WELCOME TO THE TUESDAY,
JUNE 3RD, TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
REGULAR MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR PLANNING COMMISSION.
MY NAME IS DANIEL WHITE I'M THE
VICE CHAIR AND I'LL BE CHAIRING
OUR MEETING TONIGHT FOR
DETAILED INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES.
PLEASE REVIEW THE FULL SENATE
MEETING AGENDA PROVIDED AT EACH
END OF THE DAIS MANAGER LEONARD
,WOULD YOU PLEASE CALL THE
ROLL?
>> OF COURSE.
SHIRLEY CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR
WHICH YOUR SECRETARY HERE,
COMMISSIONER MILLER OR
COMMISSIONER RAYBURN'S
COMMISSIONER DISH COMMISSIONER
LS HERE COMMISSIONER BE HERE
COMMISSIONER
ADAMS HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER NORTON HERE YOU
HAVE A QUORUM.
>> THANK YOU MR. LEINERT.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
WHETHER IT BE SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR PLEASE VOTE BY SAYING I
ANY OPPOSE THE MOTION CARRIES.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE MINUTES OF THE MAY 20TH
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE MEETING MOVE
BY COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED
BY COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE
IS THERE ANY DISCUSSION OF THE
MINUTES ALL THOSE IN FAVOR THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY I OPPOSE THE
MOTION CARRIES.
NEXT UP OUR REPORTS TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
COMMUNICATION GIVEN THAT
COUNCIL MEMBER IS ABSENT, THE
STAFF WANT TO GIVE US ANY
UPDATES OF WHAT HAPPENED LAST
NIGHT AT CITY COUNCIL.
I'D BE HAPPY TO.
THANK YOU, MR. WARNER.
LAST NIGHT AT CITY COUNCIL WE
HAD SEVERAL COMMISSION RELATED
BUSINESS ITEMS.
WE HAD APPROVAL OF REZONING AT
THIRTY EIGHT OH ONE STONE
SCHOOL AND TWENTY EIGHT SIXTY
TWO STONE SCHOOL.
THESE WERE TWO PETITIONS BY ANN
ARBOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
WE ALSO HAD THE PROPOSED
REZONING OF TWENTY THREE TWENTY
FIVE CRISTOL WAY THIS IS AN
EXPANSION OF THE HICKORY NATURE
AREA NATURAL AREA.
>> WE HAD THE REZONING OF THREE
FORTY THREE S FIFTH THIS IS THE
DOWNTOWN LIBRARY WE HAD THE AND
ALSO APPROVAL OF UDC AMENDMENT
THAT PROVIDES FOR U.D.
MODIFICATION TO BE SOUGHT BY
FRACTIONAL PARCEL OWNERS WHEN
PART OF A LARGER MULTI PARCEL
PLAN DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT MORE
REMOTE OR RELATED TO FORMER
ACTION.
>> THE CITY COUNCIL ALSO PASSED
A AFFORDABILITY AGREEMENT FOR
616 EAST WASHINGTON.
THIS IS THE PROJECT UNDER
CONSTRUCTION BEHIND THE
MICHIGAN THEATER AND THAT
MEMORIALIZE OUR NINETEEN
AFFORDABLE UNITS WILL BE
MAINTAINED IN THAT PROJECT.
>> THANK YOU MR. LEARNER.
WE WILL HAVE YOUR MANAGER
REPORT IF YOU'RE READY.
NO THANK YOU MR. LEONARD.
DO ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS,
OFFICERS OR COMMITTEE LIAISONS
HAVE ANYTHING TO REPORT
?
>> ALL RIGHT.
WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS ARE
PROVIDED IN TODAY'S PACKET
WHICH IS AVAILABLE ON
LEGISLATIVE.
SO WE COME TO ITEM NUMBER SIX
WHICH IS PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON ISSUES NOT
LISTED AS A PUBLIC HEARING AND
I DO NOT BELIEVE WE HAVE A
PUBLIC HEARING SO YOU CAN SPEAK
ABOUT ANYTHING TONIGHT WE WILL
FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE OF YOU
WHO ARE GATHERED HERE IN THE
CHAMBER.
THEN WE WILL MOVE TO REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS.
IF YOU ARE SPEAKING REMOTELY,
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
PHONE OR USE THE RAISED HAND
FEATURE IN ZOOM FOR PHONE
ACCESS CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TWO TWO
EXCUSE ME FOR SEVEN AND INNER
MEETING ID NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX
SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE OR BY
THEIR NAME IF THEY'RE
CONNECTING THE ZOO YOU WILL
HEAR AN ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN TO
YOUR TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE MOVE
TO A QUIET AREA AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS WHETHER IN THE
CHAMBER OR ON ZOOME PLEASE
STATE YOUR NAME AND YOUR
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS IF YOU'RE HERE
IN THE CHAMBER THERE ARE THREE
LIGHTS ON THE PODIUM.
THE FIRST LIGHT IS GREEN.
IT MEANS YOU'RE GOOD TO GO THE
SECOND LIGHT IS YELLOW.
IT MEANS YOU SHOULD WRAP UP
YOUR COMMENTS.
>> THE LIGHT IS RED.
IT MEANS YOU SHOULD STOP AND
SEE THE FLOOR.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME?
JUST COME RIGHT ON UP.
>> YES, YOU.
>> HI, I'M KATHLEEN NOLAN.
I LIVE AT TWO SIX FOUR FIVE
EASY STREET IN ANN ARBOR AND
JUST GIVE ME A MOMENT TO FIND
MY TALKING POINTS.
I'M TALKING ABOUT THE MASTER
PLAN DRAFT.
I DON'T RECALL WHAT IT'S
PROPERLY CALLED SO THAT'S WHAT
I'M REFERRING TO.
ANN ARBOR IS A HIGHLY DESIRABLE
PLACE TO LIVE WITHIN THE
DETROIT METRO AREA AND THE PLAN
THAT'S BEING PROPOSED REMOVES
CONSTRAINTS AND UNLEASHES
MARKET FORCES TO EXTRACT THE
MAXIMUM POSSIBLE VALUE FROM
EACH PARCEL OF LAND CURRENTLY
ZONED AS SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL.
>> IT ALLOWS FOR MULTIFAMILY
STRUCTURES TO BE BUILT RIGHT UP
OR VERY CLOSE TO THE PROPERTY
LINE.
THIS WILL REDUCE THE ENJOYMENT
VALUE FOR MANY IN ADJACENT
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES AND
THEREFORE CAUSE HARM TO THOSE
OF US WHO WISH TO CONTINUE WITH
QUALITY OF LIFE AND REMAIN IN
ANN ARBOR.
THOSE SAME HOMEOWNERS WOULD BE
OFFERED LARGE SUMS OF MONEY TO
SELL THEIR HOMES TO DEVELOPERS
TO BUILD MORE LARGE STRUCTURES.
THE NET EFFECT WOULD PROBABLY
BE AN EXODUS OF CURRENT
HOMEOWNERS WHO WANT OR NEED TO
POCKET THE CASH AND ALSO A
GREAT MONEYMAKING OPPORTUNITY
FOR DEVELOPERS.
I FAIL TO SEE THE ADVANTAGE FOR
PEOPLE LIKE ME AND OTHER
CURRENT HOMEOWNERS.
NO CONSIDERATION APPEARS TO
HAVE BEEN GIVEN TO THE ESTHETIC
OR CHARACTER OF THE TOWN WHICH
IS THE COMMON GOOD AND WE ALL
KNOW THAT THE FREE MARKET DOES
NOT TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE VALUE
OF COMMON GOODS INCREASING THE
HOUSING STOCK IN ANN ARBOR IN
THIS PARTICULAR MINIMALLY
CONSTRAINED WAY MAY HAVE A
TRICKLE DOWN EFFECT THAT
REDUCES HOUSING COSTS AND SOME
OTHER COMMUNITY NEARBY PROBABLY
NOT LIKELY TO HAPPEN IN ANN
ARBOR AND THAT'S BEEN
ACKNOWLEDGED BY PEOPLE INVOLVED
WITH THE PLAN INCLUDING THE
MAYOR WHO POPPED BY MY
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING RECENTLY.
THIS IS NOT A MAGIC BULLET OR
QUICK FIX INSTEAD IT'S LIKELY
TO RAISE COSTS IN ANN ARBOR FOR
THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE AND
RESULT IN A LESS FINANCIALLY
DIVERSE COMMUNITY.
>> THE PRIMARY BENEFICIARIES
WILL BE RESIDENTS WHO SELL
THEIR SINGLE FAMILY HOMES AT A
PREMIUM AND THE DEVELOPERS WHO
BUY THEM FOR TEAR DOWN
RETAINING AND INCREASING THE
FINANCIAL DIVERSITY OF THE
COMMUNITY WHILE MAINTAINING
PLEASING ESTHETIC WHETHER THE
CURRENT ESTHETIC OR SOMETHING
NEW WOULD REQUIRE A CAREFULLY
THOUGHT PLAN THAT TARGETS AND
THAT'S NOT THIS PLAN.
>> THANK YOU.
AND THE DOCUMENT WE'RE
CONSIDERING IS THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN.
YES, THANK YOU.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
ALL THREE FIVE SIX FIVE FOX
DRIVE.
PART OF THE REASONS FOR
SPEAKING TONIGHT IS JUST TO PUT
THIS IN THE PUBLIC RECORD.
I DON'T HAVE A PREPARED
STATEMENT BUT I DO HAVE THIS
GRAPHIC WHICH I PRESENTED
NUMEROUS TIMES.
I THINK THAT IF WE ASK THE
RESIDENTS IN TO GIVE THE CITY A
GRADE FOR THEIR INFORCE
STRUCTURE MANAGEMENT THE ROADS,
THE WATER, SEWER ETC. I DON'T
THINK WE EXPECTED A PLUS OR
EVEN A SO IF WE CAN'T MANAGE
OUR EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE,
WHAT DO WE HAVE TO DO TO MANAGE
GROWTH IN THE CITY TO HAVE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE NEED?
GROWTH IS INEVITABLE.
I AGREE WITH THAT.
SO WHAT DO WE HAVE TO DO AND I
THINK WE HAVE TO HAVE AN HONEST
DISCUSSION.
>> WE HAVE TO HAVE DATA DRIVEN
DECISIONS.
SO I'VE ADDRESSED A FEW ISSUES
HERE AND I WANT TO SHOW YOU
FIRST JUST TO GET YOUR
ATTENTION THE CRASH RATE IN ANN
ARBOR FOR PEDESTRIANS
INCAPACITATING AND FATAL
CRASHES IN ANN ARBOR THIS YEAR.
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE IS ON TRACK
FOR BEING THE WORST YEAR IN
OVER A DECADE.
THIS IS NOT MY DATA.
THIS IS FROM CRASHES IAN
HARPER.
SO I THINK WE CAN ALL AGREE ON
TWO THINGS WE DON'T GET AWAY IN
TERMS OF INFRASTRUCTURE
MANAGEMENT B WE'VE GOT A MAJOR
CRISIS IN TERMS OF PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY AND WE NEED TO ADDRESS
IT.
SO I'LL JUST QUICKLY GO THROUGH
THESE CROSSWALKS.
WE HAVE OPPORTUNITIES TO BETTER
ILLUMINATE SOME OF OUR
CROSSWALKS, BETTER MARK SOME
OF OUR CROSSWALKS THERE ARE
STANDARDS FOR THIS.
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN IS NOT
USING A TWO ZERO BUT THEY'RE
USING A SAFE SYSTEMS APPROACH
THAT SPECIFICALLY ADDRESSES
LIGHTING SO IT'S NOT OPTIONAL
ANYMORE.
IT'S PART OF THE TRAFFIC
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM LINE
OF SIGHT SIGHTLINES ANN ARBOR
HAS DENIED THAT SIGHTLINES ARE
NEEDED, THAT SITE LINES EXIST.
VEGETATION IS THE WORST IT'S
BEEN IN OVER A DECADE OVERGROWN
VEGETATION WHEN A TICKET IS PUT
INTO A TO FIX IT THE CITY
USUALLY SPENDS A MONTH OR TWO.
>> THEN THEY RESPOND AND BY
THEN THE SUMMER IS OVER.
BUT WE'VE LIVED WITH THOSE
DANGEROUS SITUATIONS.
ANOTHER CASE TOO A CYCLE TRACKS
ON MILLER ROAD 90 BLINTZ.
AS I'VE SAID BEFORE, NO ONE IN
THE WORLD RECOMMENDS A TWO WAY
CYCLE TRACK WITH NINETY BLIND
SPOTS.
SO I'VE TAKEN THAT UP WITH THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL IN LARRA
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY WE CAN
ALWAYS DO BETTER IDENTIFYING
WHERE THE PUBLIC
RIGHT OF WAY
IS SO THAT HOMEOWNERS HAVE A
GOOD EXPECTATION AND ARE NOT
OUT THERE PLANTING CHRISTMAS
TREES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY
AND THEN WE'RE UPSET WHEN WE
COME THROUGH WITH A SIDEWALK.
SO AND LASTLY, HONEST
DISCUSSION.
I'VE ALREADY TALKED ABOUT IT SO
THANKS FOR LISTENING.
THANK YOU.
OK, I'M JIM PIKE.
>> I LIVE AT 912 PAMONA ROAD
AND I THINK THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
DRAFT IS PRETTY GOOD.
I WISH THAT THERE WAS A TWO
PAGE SORT OF EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
OF WHAT THE CHANGES PLANNED
WERE WERE ACTUALLY AND I WISH
THAT WERE RIGHT AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY FIVE PAGE LENGTH OF THE
CURRENT DOCUMENT BECAUSE IT'S
IT'S HARD TO READ THE DRAFT AS
IT IS RIGHT NOW.
SO WHILE IT MAKES ME SAD THAT
SOME PEOPLE ARE LETTING ME READ
IT FOR THEM, I WISH THAT PEOPLE
WOULDN'T DO THAT AND I WOULD
LIKE TO GIVE THEM LESS REASON
TO DO THAT AND OVERALL I JUST I
I'M NOT A FAN OF EXCLUSIONARY
ZONING SO I HOPE WE CAN GET RID
OF EXCLUSIONARY SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING HERE AND I LIKE LIVING
IN A CITY WITH PEOPLE SO I LOOK
FORWARD TO WELCOMING MORE
PEOPLE BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE KIND
OF WHAT IT'S ALL ABOUT.
>> SO I GUESS THAT'S IT.
THANKS.
THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
COMMISSION CARQUEST THIRTY FIVE
ON FIVE CHARTERED PLACE WHICH
IS NOT IN A HISTORIC DISTRICT.
I WANTED TO GIVE SOME SPECIFIC
FEEDBACK ON THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX.
I THINK IT WAS PRETTY GOOD I
WENT BACK TO THE LAST COUPLE
OF WORK PLANS JUST TO SEE IF IT
PICKED UP MOST OF THOSE THINGS
AS WELL.
SO I OUTLINED THIS IN MY
WRITTEN FEEDBACK BUT I SAW ONE
THING IN ONE POINT ONE THAT WAS
A LITTLE CONCERNING ABOUT
SPECIAL REGULATION FOR PLUS
BEDROOM BUILDINGS.
I DIDN'T RECALL THAT BEING A
DISCUSSION PRIOR TO NOW.
SO I WAS JUST CURIOUS WHERE
THAT CAME FROM.
I DO SUPPORT THE LATER
SUGGESTION AT ONE POINT FOR
ABOUT ENCOURAGING CO-OPS AND
ROOMING HOUSES IN ONE POINT TWO
THERE IS A NOTE ABOUT
DEVELOPING PREAPPROVE
PREAPPROVE PLANS AND DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS FOR INFILL.
I THINK THAT WOULD BE GOOD AS A
NEAR TERM ITEM INSTEAD
OF INTERMEDIATE TERM SINCE THAT
SEEMS TO BE A CONCERN.
>> THE SECTION ABOUT PARKS I
THINK THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF DEBATE ABOUT HOW TO HANDLE
EASEMENTS AND IMPROVING
COMMUNITY ACCESS TO THE PARKS
THAT WE ALREADY HAVE.
I KNOW IN MY AREA THERE'S A
PARK NAROK WAY THAT HAS NO REAL
ENTRANCE AND IT'S ACTUALLY NEAR
A SCHOOL.
SO IF IF THOSE ENTRANCES AND
TRAILS WERE DEVELOPED THE
CHILDREN COULD USE THAT TO GET
TO SCHOOL.
SO I WOULD JUST LIKE TO
EMPHASIZE TRYING TO DEVELOP
ACCESS TO EXISTING PARKS IN
FIVE THREE THERE'S A STATEMENT
THAT SAYS ENCOURAGE A WIDE
RANGE OF BUSINESSES BY OFFERING
FLEXIBILITY IN LAND USE AND
REGULATIONS IN KEY LOCATIONS.
THIS SEEMS TO IMPLY KIND
SUBDIVIDING THE TRANSITION
DISTRICTS.
I JUST WANTED TO HIGHLIGHT THAT
I WOULDN'T SUPPORT DOING
ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS OR
ALLOWANCES THERE.
THE MOST CONCERNING THING TO ME
WAS IN FIVE THREE AND SIX TO IN
FIVE THREE ENSURE THAT ZONING
ALLOW BUSINESSES THAT MAINTAIN
A VARIETY AUTOMOBILE AUTOMOBILE
BASED BUSINESS MODELS.
THAT WAS A LITTLE CONCERNING
AND IT SEEMS TO CONTRADICT ONE
AND IN SIX TO PROMOTE
ADDITIONAL DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
BY RETROFITTING CAR ORIENTED
SHOPPING CENTERS LIKE BRIARWOOD
TO INCREASE THEIR MIX OF USES
AND WALKABILITY OVER TIME.
I THINK WITH BRIARWOOD THE SORT
OF THE HORSES OUT OF THE BARN
ON THAT ONE BECAUSE IT IS JUST
REDEVELOPING INCREMENTALLY BUT
I WOULD SO FAR I'VE HEARD FROM
THIS BODY THAT YOU WOULD LIKE
WHOLESALE REDEVELOPMENT
OF SHOPPING CENTERS NOT
INCREMENTAL.
>> SO I'D JUST LIKE TO KEEP AN
EYE ON THAT.
THANK THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN THE
CHAMBER?
GOOD EVENING COMMISSIONERS.
I'M BRIAN CHAMBERS.
WARD THREE TO TWENTY ONE
FIFTEEN MEMBER WEIGHING.
I HAVE A FEW COMMENTS MAYBE NOT
AS SPECIFIC AS THE LAST
REFERENCE THEM BY NUMBER BUT
WHEN I READ THROUGH THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX I WAS
EXCITED TO SEE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING CALLED OUT.
I EVEN SAW LOGITECH IN TERMS
OF FINANCIAL FORMS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING CALLED
OUT.
I SAW CO-OPS.
OH NO THIS IS ALL FANTASTIC.
WE WANT MORE FORMS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
WHAT WAS MISSING WERE COMMUNITY
LAND TRUSTS.
I'M NOT ASKING TO HAVE ONE BY
NAME.
THERE IS AN ENTITY IN ANN ARBOR
THAT'S JUST FORMING AND HAS
BEEN MEETING WITH THE CITY AND
EVEN HAS A RELATIONSHIP NOW
WITH GEORGE GIANT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE IS LISTED
WITH THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMMISSION AS A LOCAL
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPER SO
WE DON'T NEED OUR NAME CALLED
OUT BUT IT WOULD BE GOOD TO
CALL OUT COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
IS A FORM OF HOUSING AND
SPEAKERS HAVE COME HERE.
THEY'VE SPOKEN IN FRONT OF CITY
COUNCIL.
I'M THINKING EVERYONE IS
RECEIVING THE OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE
HOMEOWNERSHIP THROUGH COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST.
IT'S A PRETTY OPPORTUNITY FOR
THE CITY.
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN CALLING FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TO SPECIFIED
IN THE LAND USE PLAN.
THIS IS A WAY TO DO IT BEYOND
JUST THE RENTALS ENLIGHTENED
NOW THE APPROVAL OF THE LEGACY
THAT JUST WENT THROUGH WITH
THOSE AFFORDABLE UNITS THAT
SOMEBODY NOTICED THOSE ARE 99
YEAR AFFORDABLE UNITS PRETTY
GOOD STILL NOT PERMANENT BUT
LATER WHAT IS IT?
FIFTEEN YEARS.
SO SPECIFYING LOGITECH IN THE
LATEST PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX IS CUTTING SHORT ON
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BECAUSE IT'S
NOT PERMANENT.
YOU ALL KNOW THIS I'M JUST
TRYING TO PLAY IT UP BECAUSE I
WAS ASKED TO SUBMIT THE
STATEMENT TO THE RECORD.
SO YOU HAD IT ON THE RECORD.
I'M VERY SUPPORTIVE OF THE LAND
USE PLAN UPDATE.
I THINK GENERAL DENSITY IS
BEING PRESCRIBED FOR WHAT'S
BEEN SINGLE FAMILY IS IDEAL.
I LIVE IN A SINGLE FAMILY HOME
MYSELF NEXT TO APARTMENTS THREE
STORY TALL APARTMENTS.
I NEVER THOUGHT THAT THAT WAS A
PROBLEM.
BACK WHEN WE MOVED IN WE
PETITIONED THE CITY TO BUILD A
PARK RIGHT NEXT TO THE
APARTMENTS BY GEORGETOWN AND
THEY DID THEY ACTUALLY BOUGHT
UNITS FROM THE DEON'S AND I
DON'T KNOW IF PEOPLE KNOW THE
HISTORY FROM DIANE BUT THE CITY
TRIED TO PUT TOGETHER A PLAN TO
PRESERVE KIMBERLY WOODS AND
THEY TOOK ALL DEON'S LAND AND
THE DUNES HAD TO SUE THE CITY
ALL THE WAY UP TO THE STATE
SUPREME COURT AND WON AND THEN
THE CITY HAD TO COME BACK AND
ACTUALLY BUY TWO LOTS BECAUSE
WE PETITIONED FROM THE DEON'S
TO SET UP A PARK JUST THIS WAY
.
SO ANYWAYS, MIXED USE HOUSING
IS GOOD WALKABLE HOUSING IS
GOOD.
THANK YOU.
SON OF HOUSING FOR TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT BY PARK
CITY SERVICES IS GOOD.
PLEASE WRITE IN COMMUNITY
OF INTEREST TO THE PLAN.
>> THANK YOU.
JUST A NOTE TO THOSE THAT ARE
IN THE CHAMBER WHEN YOU ARE
SPEAKING COULD YOU SPEAK INTO
THE MIC?
IT IS HELPFUL FOR THOSE WHO ARE
ONLINE TO HEAR YOU.
WE CAN HEAR YOU FINE IN THE
CHAMBER BUT IT CAN BE DIFFICULT
ONLINE.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
MY NAME IS GREG MONROE.
I LIVE AT TWELVE SIXTY ONE
BENDING ROAD.
I THINK I HAD SOME PRE PREPARED
COMMENTS ABOUT THE IMPACT ON
THE SUPPLY OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND INSTEAD
OF INCENTIVIZING DESTRUCTION
OF MORE AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN
FAVOR OF LUXURY UNITS
ATTRACTING NEW WEALTHIER
RESIDENTS.
BUT I THINK THE THE PRIMARY
POINT I'D LIKE TO MAKE IS THAT
THERE SEEMS TO BE A LOT
OF COMMON GROUND ON ASPECTS THE
PLAN THAT DON'T HAVE TO DO WITH
THE ARE ONE AND THE ARE TO UP
ZONING AND I WOULD ENCOURAGE
THE COMMISSION TO PERHAPS
REMOVE THAT LANGUAGE AND FIND
CONSENSUS.
I DON'T ENJOY COMING DOWN HERE
IN DISAGREEING WITH MY
NEIGHBORS.
RIGHT.
I THINK WHERE I MOVED BACK TO
ANN BARBER BECAUSE I THINK IT'S
A WONDERFUL AND INCLUSIVE
COMMUNITY AND I WONDER IF
THERE'S SOME CONSENSUS THAT WE
CAN MOVE FORWARD AND PERHAPS
PAUSE THE PLAN AND THINK ABOUT
WHAT WE SHOULD REALLY DO WITH
THE OTHER ONE IN OUR ZONING.
AND I ACTUALLY REALLY AGREE
WITH THIS GENTLEMAN.
I HAVE ZERO PROBLEM WITH
APARTMENT BUILDINGS BEING BUILT
IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
I THINK MY CONCERN IS THAT WHAT
I HAVE SEEN AND I'VE GOT SOME
EXAMPLES HERE THAT I'LL GET TO
JUST A MOMENT IS THAT THERE ARE
NOT NEW APARTMENT BUILDINGS
COMING TO THESE NEIGHBORHOODS.
WHAT I SEE IS THAT THERE ARE
LUXURY DEVELOPMENTS, LUXURY
CONDOMINIUMS WHICH ARE ACTUALLY
DISPLACING THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING STOCK AND IN FAVOR
OF ATTRACTING NEW WEALTHIER
RESIDENTS.
RIGHT.
THAT IS MY PRIMARY CONCERN WITH
THIS PLAN AND JUST A COUPLE
OF POINTS TOOK OFF.
DEVELOPERS DON'T PRIORITIZE
LUXURY UNITS.
THEY BUILD HIGH END PROPERTIES
BECAUSE THAT'S WHERE THE PROFIT
MARGINS ARE HIGHEST LUXURY
SUPPLY DOES NOT TRICKLE DOWN
THESE NEW UNITS AGAIN ATTRACT
NEW WEALTHIER RESIDENTS AND
DECREASE THE SUPPLY OF LOW AND
MODERATE HOUSING OPTIONS UP
ZONING INCREASES LAND
SPECULATION WHEN ZONING
ALLOWS
FOR HIGHER DENSITY LAND VALUES
INCREASE BASED ON WHAT COULD BE
BUILT NOT WHAT IS THERE NOW
MAKING PROPERTY MORE EXPENSIVE
AND INCENTIVIZING SPECULATION
WHICH DOES NOT IMPROVE
AFFORDABILITY.
IT ALSO INCENTIVIZES THE
DEMOLITION OF OUR EXISTING
HOUSING STOCK AND REALLY HAS
THE POTENTIAL TO CREATE
NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE AND
DISPLACEMENT RIGHT.
SO LUXURY SHIFTS DEMOGRAPHICS
ATTRACTING HIGHER INCOME BUYERS
AND RENTERS INCREASES PRICES
FOR NEARBY HOMES WHICH
DISPLACES LONG TIME RESIDENTS.
AND IF YOU DON'T THINK THIS
WILL HAPPEN IN ANN ARBOR, IT
ALREADY IS.
SO I'LL POINT EVERYONE TO A
COUPLE OF EXAMPLES THAT HAVE
HAPPENED IN LOWERTOWN IN THE
LAST YEAR OR SO.
SO THE JAY SINCLAIR DEVELOPMENT
PLEASE GOOGLE CHECK IT OUT FOUR
STORY LUXURY CONDO CONDOMINIUM
DEVELOPMENT WITH FIFTEEN UNITS
STARTING AT THREE TO FIVE
MILLION DOLLARS.
SO DENSITY HIGH HIGH NOT MARKET
RATE AT ONE HUNDRED EIGHT
HUNDRED TWENTY FIVE DOLLARS A
SQUARE FOOT ONE POINT TO FIVE
MILLION PER BEDROOM.
IT IS DRAMATICALLY MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN THE EXISTING
HOMES IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
SELLING AT THREE HUNDRED SIXTY
FIVE SQUARE FEET AND TWO
HUNDRED PER BEDROOM.
LOOK AT THE RIVER NORTH PROJECT
WHICH RECENTLY BROKE GROUND BY
THEY'RE CUTTING DIELDRIN ACRE
BITRATE GROWTH FOREST.
I'M GOING TO FAST FORWARD MY
MOST THING IS SEVEN ONE SEVEN
FELT STREET.
THIS WAS A TWO FAMILY FLAT FLAT
THAT WAS HOUSE THREE GRADUATE
STUDENTS ABOUT A THOUSAND
DOLLARS A MONTH RECENTLY SOLD A
DEVELOPER.
THEY'VE BEEN EVICTED.
THE HOUSE WILL SOON BE
DEMOLISHED.
>> WHAT WILL REPLACE IT WILL
NOT BE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THANK YOU.
IF YOU HAVEN'T ALREADY
SUBMITTED YOUR COMMENTS TO US,
YOU CAN EMAIL THEM SO THAT WE
CAN GET THE FULL COMMENTS THAT
YOU WANTED TO SHARE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> YEAH YEAH IT'S PLANNING AT A
TOO BIG AND THEN IT'LL GO INTO
OUR PACKET AND THEN WE WILL
READ IT.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN THE
CHAMBER WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
MR. LEONARD?
DO WE HAVE REMOTE PARTICIPANTS?
WE DO READ YOU CAN ON MUTE AND
ADDRESS THE PLANNING PERMISSION
FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU CHAIRMAN WISCH
COMMISSION AND AN AUDIENCE
REFERENCE THIRTY THIRTY
LEXINGTON FORTY ONE TO FIVE THE
SECOND WORD PROUD RESIDENT
OF ANN ARBOR SINCE NINETEEN
NINETY THREE.
LET ME FIRST ONCE AGAIN SAY
THANK YOU TO ALL OF YOU ON THIS
PUSH.
THIS IS A CHALLENGING JOB.
THERE'S A LOT OF CONFLICTING
GOALS NOT NOT EASY STUFF AND
I'LL JOKE FOR THE COMMISSION
MEMBERS THAT'S HOW YOU GET PAID
THE BIG BUCKS WHICH OF COURSE
MOST IN THE AUDIENCE I'M SURE
KNOW THE PLANNING COMMISSION IS
A VOLUNTEER ROLE.
I CAME ACROSS A WONDERFUL
ARTICLE BY CHUCK MAHONE WHO IS
THE FOUNDER OF THE GROUP STRONG
TOWNE'S.
I'M SURE THOSE ON THE PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR THEM THEY NEED
NO INTRODUCTION FOR THE
AUDIENCE.
STRONG TALENT IS A NONPROFIT
GROUP WHO ADVOCATES FOR URBAN
IMPROVEMENT AND PROPOSES MANY
OF THE SAME KIND
OF IMPROVEMENTS THAT WE WOULD
LIKE TO DO HERE.
BUT THE SPECIFIC POINT MAN
CHUCK MAKES IN THIS ARTICLE IS
WE NEED TO IMPROVE AND
IMPLEMENT THESE THROUGH
GRASSROOTS BOTTOM UP ENGAGEMENT
NOT TOP DOWN IMPOSITION
GRASSROOTS BOTTOM NOT TOP DOWN.
I AM NOT GOING TO SAY MANY
OF THAT GEE I HAD NO IDEA THAT
THIS THING WAS HAPPENING.
I DID MY NOTES SHOW THAT THE
FIRST MEETING I ATTENDED WAS IN
SEPTEMBER TWENTY TWENTY THREE
SO I'VE BEEN TRYING TO FOLLOW
IT AS MAYOR TAYLOR REFERRED TO
THE NERDS AND CITY COUNCIL OR
CITY HALL.
I'M ONE OF THE NERDS WHO LIVES
HERE SO I SENT IN THE WRITTEN
COMMENTS THE LINK FOR THAT
ARTICLE.
IT WOULD SIMPLY SAY WAS THE
PLAN.
TAKE A LOOK.
HOW DO WE INCORPORATE ALL THIS
AND PUT IT IN A GENUINE WAY AND
MAKE THIS PLAN ACCEPTED?
THE HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE HAVE
SHOWN UP COMPLAINING ARE A
POWERFUL CLUE THAT THE
ENGAGEMENT NEEDS MORE WORK SO
THERE IS NO JOURNEY GONE SO FAR
YOU CANNOT STOP AND CHANGE
DIRECTION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
CAMI PATHIC KOOCHIE
YOU CAN I'M HERE TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES.
GO AHEAD
.
>> YOU CAN GO AHEAD AND ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AT THIS
TIME WE CAN COME BACK IF YOU
WANT TO AFTER
MARCH CARABAO YOU
CAN ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO THREE MINUTES.
THIS IS MY ABOUT TWENTY
SEVENTEEN FOURTH STREET AND
WITH SOME COMMENTS ABOUT THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX.
BUT MR. WESTFALL COVERED MOST
OF THEM.
THERE'S LOTS OF DETAILS IN HERE
THAT I'M SURE YOU'LL GET TO IN
A FEW MINUTES.
I WOULD JUST BE WARY OF ANY
LANGUAGE LIKE CONTEXTUALLY
APPROPRIATE TO DESIRED AREA
ATTRIBUTES THAT SOMETHING IN
SECTION FIVE POINT THREE IT
SEEMS VAGUE AND I DON'T KNOW IF
WE DEFINE WHAT OUR DESIRED AREA
ATTRIBUTES FOR ANY GIVEN AREA
THEN I WANT TO TAKE A MOMENT TO
ADDRESS SOME OF THE OTHER
COMMENTS I'VE HEARD TONIGHT I
LIVE IN A DETACHED SINGLE
FAMILY HOME AND IT WAS BUILT IN
THE 70S LIKE MOST OF OUR OR
MUCH OF OUR HOUSING.
SO BECAUSE WE HAVEN'T ALLOWED
MUCH NEW CONSTRUCTION HAPPENED
SINCE NEW STUFF GENERALLY
SPEAKING IS EXPENSIVE.
NEW CELL PHONES ARE EXPENSIVE.
NEW HOUSING JUST THE COST
OF MATERIALS AND THE LABOR TO
BUILD THINGS IS EXPENSIVE.
SIMILARLY SOMEBODY SAID THAT
UPTURNING AREAS WILL INCREASE
THE LAND VALUES AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CONSULTANT FROM THE
COMPANY AND CONSULTING GROUP
BROUGHT UP AS WELL.
AND I THINK THAT'S TRUE.
THE KEY POINTS TO ME ARE THAT
WHEN YOU OBSERVE ON LAND AND
THE LAND VALUE GOES UP THE
VALUE PER RESIDENT CAN GO DOWN
IF YOU ALLOW FOR DENSITY COST
THAT ONE PERSON HAS TO PAY TO
ACCOUNT FOR THE HOUSING THAT
THEY'RE LIVING IN CAN BE LESS
THAN IF YOU REQUIRE ONE FAMILY
TO OCCUPY A LARGE LOT SIMPLY
BECAUSE THE NEW STUFF COSTS A
LOT OF MONEY.
THERE'S NO GUARANTEE THAT WHEN
WE LET THE FREE MARKET WHICH IS
THIS COUNTRY GRIPS BUILD STUFF
THAT IT'S GOING TO BE CHEAP .
>> THINGS TEND TO AGE TO
AFFORDABILITY BUT IN ARMORER WE
HAVE THIS INCREDIBLE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING VILLAGE AND THAT MEANS
THAT NEW MARKET RENT
DEVELOPMENT THAT'S EXPENSIVE
THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE VERY HIGH
INCOMES CAN AFFORD.
THEY PAY MUCH HIGHER
PERCENTAGES OF TAXES AND IN
SOME OF THOSE TAXES GO TOWARDS
ARE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
SO I'M REALLY EXCITED TO
SUPPORT THIS PLAN.
I'M EXCITED TO SEE THIS SHORT
MATRIX THAT DEFINES REALLY
SHORT TERM GOALS, VERY SHORT
TERM ACTIONS TO START GETTING
TO WORK IMMEDIATELY ON OUR OUR
GOAL TO MOBILITY AND EQUITY AND
I'LL LEAVE IT THERE.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
NO OTHER HANDS ARE RAISED.
THANK YOU, MR. LENNART.
STILL NOT OK.
>> GREAT.
>> SO I WILL CLOSE THE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
>> THE TIMER WENT OFF
APPROPRIATELY.
YES.
AND MOVED TO SIX EIGHT WHICH IS
A NEW AGENDA ITEM THAT WE'VE
ADDED TO ALLOW MEMBERS OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO RESPOND
TO COMMENTS EITHER WRITTEN OR
IN PERSON BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO
ITEM NUMBER SEVEN.
>> COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
YEAH, YOU WANT TO THANK THE
COMMISSIONER I'M SORRY I DIDN'T
CATCH YOUR NAME GENTLEMAN IN A
BLACK SHIRT.
I WAS LISTENING TO YOUR
COMMENTS ABOUT LOWRIDERS AND I
I THINK IT WOULD CERTAINLY BE
EASIER TO IGNORE THOSE
DISTRICTS OF THE CITY.
RIGHT.
I WANTED TO TALK A LITTLE BIT
WHY I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT NOT
TO THERE'S A LOT OF RESEARCH
THAT HAS BEEN WRITTEN ABOUT
FILTERING AND HOW FILTERING
KIND OF FLOWS IN BOTH
DIRECTIONS.
THERE'S A SCHOLAR AT ROSS WHOSE
NAME IS BRIAN CONNOLLY AND I'LL
JUST READ FROM HIS PIECE THE
BOSTON COLLEGE LAW REVIEW
SCHOLARS HAVE DEMONSTRATED THAT
CONSUCTING NEW HOUSING SUPPLY
FOR OTHERS FILTERING OR THE
AGING AND DEPRECIATING OLDER
HOUSING STOCK THAT OVER TIME
BECOMES MORE AFFORDABLE TO
MIDDLE AND LOWER INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS.
FILTERING IS THE LARGEST SOURCE
OF NEW LOW INCOME HOUSING IN
AMERICA AND SUPPLY CONSTRAINED
MARKETS, HOWEVER, WHICH HAVE A
SHORTAGE OF NEWER AVAILABLE
UNITS UNITS UP AS HIGHER AND
HIGHER INCOME HOUSEHOLDS OCCUPY
BOULDER DEPRECIATED HOUSING AND
THUS DISPLACE LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS.
>> WHEN YOU MENTIONED FELT
STREET THAT INSTANTLY WAS
SOMETHING THAT RESONATED WITH
ME BECAUSE I LIVE CLOSE TO THAT
AND I'VE LIVED IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD SINCE 2012 AND I'M
AN EXAMPLE OF SOMEBODY WHO'S
HIGHER INCOME WHO WENT IN AND
BOUGHT AN OLDER CHEAPER HOME
AND THREW OVER THE LAST 10
YEARS THE RENOVATIONS HAVE MADE
IT COMPLETELY UNAFFORDABLE AND
WE'RE SEEING THAT THROUGHOUT
THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> SO I'M KIND OF AN EXAMPLE
OF THAT OTHER DYNAMIC THAT
REVERSE FILTERING WHERE BECAUSE
I DIDN'T HAVE OTHER PLACES TO
BUY I BOUGHT WHERE I DID AND
THEN I TOOK A LOWER INCOME OR
MIDDLE INCOME HOUSE OFF THE
MARKET AND HELPED TO CHANGE MY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THAT'S SOMETHING I'M VERY
INCLINED TO REVERSE IS A TREND
LONG TERM IT TAKES A LOT
OF TIME.
ONE OF THE ARTICLES THAT I LOVE
THIS IS A 1965 PIECE FROM THE
END OF OUR NEWS .
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE I THINK
TURNED ME ON TO A ONE POINT.
THE TITLE OF THIS PIECE IS HIGH
RISE CONSTRUCTION HITS TWENTY
TWO MILLION DOLLAR MARK AND
THIS IS ABOUT A LUXURY
APARTMENT BUILDING THAT'S TEN
STORIES HIGH AT TEN FIFTY WALL
STREET.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE PRICES
OF THAT PROPERTY NOW THEY'RE
NOT AFFORDABLE BUT IN TERMS
OF WHAT I WOULD CALL AFFORDABLE
BUT THEY'RE MORE AFFORDABLE
THAN A LOT OF THE APARTMENTS
AND CONDOS THAT YOU SEE AROUND
ANN ARBOR BECAUSE IT'S AN AGED
PIECE OF PROPERTY.
A LOT OF WHAT WE'RE WORKING ON
HERE HAS A TIME HORIZON TO IT
THAT'S MEASURED IN DECADES.
A LOT OF BAD HOUSING DECISIONS
WERE MADE DECADES AGO AND I'M
NOT I'M CERTAINLY NOT OF THE
OPINION THAT BY TACKLING LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL IN THE PLAN OR
ENGAGING IN ZONING REFORM
RELATING TO LOW RISE THAT WE'RE
GOING TO SEE INSTANTANEOUS
CHANGE THAT'S JUST NOT TALKED A
LOT ABOUT THAT IN MY COMMENTS.
I DON'T THINK THAT'S HOW IT'S
GOING TO WORK BUT I OWE IT TO
MY KIDS TO TRY TO REVERSE SOME
OF THE TRENDS THAT HAVE MADE IT
IMPOSSIBLE EVEN FOR LITTLE I'M
A CORPORATE ATTORNEY.
I STRUGGLE TO BUY A HOUSE HERE
AND THAT WAS FORMATIVE FOR ME
AND MY ENGAGEMENT IN POLITICS
AND ABOUT POLITICS.
IT'S PART OF THE REASON WHY I'M
ON THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
IT'S PERSONAL TO ME THAT WE
CHANGE THAT TREND.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
COMMISSIONER MILLS, I WOULD
JUST LIKE TO CONTINUE TO THANK
FOLKS WHO HAVE SHOWN UP BEFORE
AND PROVIDED NEW COMMENTS ON
KIND OF WHAT THEY'VE HEARD
TAKING IT INTO TAKING INTO
ACCOUNT THE THE NEW MATERIALS
BEFORE US.
SO THANK YOU.
AND I ALSO WANT TO EXTEND
APPRECIATION FOR THE PEOPLE WHO
HAVEN'T PARTICIPATED BEFORE WHO
ARE NEW TONIGHT AND CALLING AND
IT'S NEVER TOO LATE TO TUNE IN
AND HAVE YOUR VOICE HEARD.
>> SO THANK YOU THANK YOU FOR
SHOWING UP
.
OK, I HAVE THREE COMMENTS.
THESE ARE ALL FROM THE WRITTEN
COMMENTS WHICH YOU CAN SEE IN
REGISTAR THE FIRST ONE I THINK
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I
UNDERSTAND HOW THIS WORKS.
I'M GOING TO ASK A QUESTION A
WRITER WROTE ABOUT A
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION THEY
WERE I GUESS REMOVED FROM THE
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION AND
THEY WANTED TO KNOW ARE THERE
RULES RELATED TO THE GOVERNANCE
OF NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS?
I HAVE AN ANSWER BUT I WANTED
TO SEE IF STAFF HAD AN ANSWER
FOR THIS COMMENT OR NOT.
THE CITY DOES NOT HAVE ANY
RULES OF GOVERNANCE FOR
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS.
WE BROADLY ACCEPT WHAT IS
PROVIDED TO US AS THE
DEFINITION OF A NEIGHBORHOOD
GEOGRAPHY AND WHO THAT
REPRESENTATIVE IS.
>> WE DO NOT PRETEND TO HAVE
THE RIGHT STRUCTURE OR METHOD
ABOUT HOW TO WHERE THOSE ARE
CREATED .
>> WE LEAVE THAT TO
NEIGHBORHOODS TO DECIDE FOR
THEMSELVES SO MR. WYO COULD
FORM HIS OWN NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION.
HE COULD CREATE THE GEOGRAPHY
FOR THAT.
HE CAN INVITE HIS NEIGHBORS AND
THEN THE CITY WOULD RECOGNIZE
THAT.
>> AND ON THE PLANNING WEBSITE
WE HAVE A REGISTRATION FORM
ABOUT IT IS A FORMAT FOR THAT
INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED TO
THE CITY.
OK, THAT WOULD BE MEMORIALIZED
ON A NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION
BASICALLY EMAIL LIST THAT WE
USE TO DISTRIBUTE WHEN PROJECTS
ARE APPROXIMATE TO THAT OR WHEN
WE RETURN TO ALL NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATIONS.
>> OK, I THINK IT'S BARBARA
TORX RETIE SORRY IF I'M
MISPRONOUNCING YOUR NAME I'M
SORRY SHE WROTE ABOUT THE
CHANGES TO THE REZONING IN
EXCLUSIONARY OR PRIMARILY
SINGLE FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS AND
I JUST WANT TO NOTE AND CLARIFY
THAT THE PROPOSED LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL ZONING WHICH WE
HAVEN'T ACTUALLY GOTTEN TO YET
DOESN'T ACTUALLY ELIMINATE THE
OPTION TO BUILD SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES WITHIN THAT ZONING
PROPERTY OWNERS WILL STILL BE
ABLE TO BUILD MAINTAIN SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES AS THEY ALWAYS
HAVE BEEN.
>> WHAT CHANGES WITH THIS NEW
ZONING DESIGNATION OR DISTRICT
RATHER IS IT WILL ALLOW FOR
MORE FLEXIBILITY IT PERMITS BUT
DOES NOT REQUIRE OTHER HOUSING
TYPES LIKE DUPLEXES TRY PLEXUS
SMALL APARTMENT BUILDINGS AND
CURRENTLY IN OUR COMPREHENSIVE
LAND USE PLAN WE ARE
RESTRICTING THESE KINDS
OF DEVELOPMENT TO THREE STORIES
SO THEY ARE NOT GOING TO JUST
BE UNLIMITED.
RIGHT.
THIS APPROACH DOESN'T REQUIRE
ANYONE TO CHANGE ANYTHING
THAT'S ALREADY THERE.
INSTEAD IT JUST OPENS THE DOOR
FOR MORE HOUSING TYPES IN AREAS
THAT HAVE BEEN HISTORICALLY
SHAPED BY EXCLUSIONARY ZONING
RULES THAT WERE DESIGNED TO
KEEP NEIGHBORHOODS ECONOMICALLY
AND RACIALLY SEGREGATED.
I THINK THAT WAS A MISTAKE.
OTHERS AGREE WITH ME AND IT'S A
MISTAKE THAT THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR HAS HAD TO LIVE WITH FOR
THE LAST 50 PLUS YEARS.
I THINK IT ALSO HAS CONTRIBUTED
TO THE CONSTRAINT IN OUR
POPULATION GROWTH IN THE CITY.
SO THESE RULES HAVE MADE IT
HARDER FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE HERE
IN ANN ARBOR, HARDER FOR US TO
WELCOME NEW NEIGHBORS AND
HARDER FOR THE CITY TO GROW
SUSTAINABLY OR EQUITABLY.
>> SO NOW WE HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY WITH THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN TO
FIX THAT AND WE ARE CONTINUING
TO HAVE THAT CONVERSATION.
THERE ARE TWO SMALL THINGS THAT
WE HEARD WHICH IS WHICH WERE
ABOUT SLOWING DOWN THE PROCESS
AND I WAS LOOKING BACK AT MR.
LEONARD IT'S MARCH 18TH MEMO ON
THE SCHEDULE AND I FEEL LIKE WE
ARE ABOUT A MONTH TO SIX WEEKS
BEHIND ON THAT SCHEDULE AS IT
IS CURRENTLY NOW IS THAT FAIR
LIKE IN TERMS OF WHEN ARE WE
STILL GOING TO BE ABLE TO
DELIVER THE PLAN TO CITY
COUNCIL AS YOU PROPOSED IN
NOVEMBER OR IN AUGUST FOR SIXTY
THREE DAYS WE SHOULD STILL BE
ABLE TO YOU MAY BE REFERRING TO
THE FACT THAT NOW WE WE PUSHED
BACK A COUPLE MORE MEETINGS AND
SO THAT WE'LL BE REVIEWING THE
SECOND DRAFT EARLY JULY BUT
THAT HOPEFULLY WILL STILL GIVE
A COUPLE OF WEEKS TURN AROUND
SO THAT WE CAN STAY ON
SCHEDULE.
>> OK, SO WE ARE RESPONDING TO
FEEDBACK AND INFORMATION THAT
WE'RE RECEIVING.
WE'RE TAKING THAT INTO
CONSIDERATION.
WE'RE MAKING ADJUSTMENTS AND
THE PLAN IS RESPONDING TO US I
THINK IN THIS PROCESS AND I HAD
ONE MORE OH ANOTHER WRITER
WROTE IN ABOUT HEARING ABOUT
THE PAUSE THE PLAN FOLKS AND
WONDER IF THERE WAS ANOTHER
GROUP THAT EXISTED IN ANN ARBOR
AND I THINK THEY'RE CALLED
NEIGHBORS FOR MORE NEIGHBORS.
IF SOMEONE COULD TELL ME WHAT
THE WEBSITE IS, I WILL SHARE
THAT BUT I DON'T HAVE IT
MEMORIZED WHICH I SHOULD.
SO I THINK IT'S LIKE AN F M IN
A TUBORG I'M REALLY LIKE
STRETCHING HERE.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS, YOU NEED TO
GO OUT ON MIKE.
>> THANK YOU AND NANCY FRANK,
MARY, NANCY AND TO DOUG OK I
WAS CLOSE SO THAT THAT'S
ANOTHER GROUP SIMILAR TO THE
POSITIVE THE PLAN FOLKS WHO ARE
ORGANIZING AROUND THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE AND YOU
CAN ENGAGE EITHER OF THOSE
GROUPS, ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS
.
COMMISSIONER NORTON, I WANT
JUST ASK MR. MONROE I THINK THE
YOU YOU SAID YOU DIDN'T SUBMIT
WRITTEN COMMENTS BUT IT WOULD
BE HELPFUL IF YOU COULD SUBMIT
WRITTEN COMMENTS ON THE POINTS
THAT YOU MADE TONIGHT AND
ESPECIALLY IF YOU'VE GOT
ACADEMIC SYSTEMATIC STUDIES
THAT DEMONSTRATE THE CONCERNS
THAT YOU'RE RAISING BECAUSE
I'VE BEEN LOOKING AT THE THINGS
PEOPLE OF BEEN SUBMITTING AND
WE'RE GETTING A MIX OF ACADEMIC
WORK SYSTEMATICALLY STUDYING
THESE PHENOMENA AND THEN
OPINION EDITORIALS THAT ARE
MAKING LOTS OF CLAIMS BUT NO
REAL STUDY TO BACK THEM UP.
SO IF YOU COULD WHEN YOU SUBMIT
MATERIALS, IF YOU COULD INCLUDE
CITATIONS TO THOSE STUDIES,
THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
COMMISSIONER MORTON, DID YOU
WANT HIM TO RESPOND OR DID YOU
JUST WANT TO IF YOU WANT TO?
>> YEAH, I WAS ASKING YOU TO
RESPOND TO NOW BUT IT'S OK.
I CAN GIVE HIM A MINUTE.
CAN YOU COME UP TO THE MIKE AND
SO YEAH I'M HAPPY TO DO THAT I
WE CAN'T HEAR YOU UNTIL YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
GO AHEAD 61 OK, SO I ACTUALLY
YOU KNOW THE I AM A LAYPERSON I
AM NOT AN ACADEMIC SCHOLAR.
I DO WANT TO MAKE THE POINT
THAT I THINK THE FACT THAT THE
PROPONENTS OF THIS PLAN
CONTINUE TO POINT TO WHAT I
FEEL LIKE ARE UNAPPROACHABLE
ACADEMIC ARTICLES IN SUPPORT.
RIGHT.
AND I WENT AND I GOOGLED PER
THE RECOMMENDATION OF MR.
WESTFALL.
RIGHT.
THE SKEPTICAL IT WAS SOMETHING
IN THE NYU ACADEMIC RESEARCH
THAT WAS PUBLISHED IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE.
WHAT I FOUND THERE WAS MOSTLY
AN ARGUMENT ABOUT HOW WHAT WAS
THE TERM ENDOGENOUS AND
STATISTICAL COMPARISON.
RIGHT.
AND IT'S REFERENCING CITIES
LIKE NEW YORK CITY OR AUCKLAND
,NEW ZEALAND WHICH I'M NOT
SURE I HAVE THE SAME MARKET
FORCES OR DYNAMICS AS ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN AND SO YES AND
EVEN WITHIN THAT STUDY THEY
REFERENCED SEVERAL FROM TWENTY
NINETEEN TWENTY SIXTEEN ET
CETERA THAT DO BACK THE THE
IDEA THAT YOU KNOW IN THIS LATE
STAGE CAPITALISM RIGHT WHERE
THERE'S TREMENDOUS WEALTH
DISPARITY ESPECIALLY IN A PLACE
LIKE ANN ARBOR WHERE IT'S A
VERY LIMITED RIGHT NOW I'M NOT
SO SURE YOU KNOW I WILL FIND
THOSE ARTICLES AND I WILL SEND
THEM
TO YOU BUT I FEEL QUITE
CONFIDENT LIKE I'VE LIVED HERE
MY WHOLE LIFE FOR THE MOST PART
I'VE DONE DENSITY.
I WANT TO BUY A HOUSE LIKE YOU,
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
AND YOU KNOW, IN SOME WAYS I
FEEL LIKE INCENTING THE
DESTRUCTION OF OTHER SINGLE
FAMILY HOUSES IS ANOTHER WAY
OF REVERSE FILTERING AND JUST
BUILDING ANOTHER BIGGER MOAT
AROUND SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
RIGHT.
LIKE I WANT TO BUY A HOUSE.
I WANT TO START A FAMILY.
I DON'T WANT TO LIVE IN A CONDO
AND I CAN'T AFFORD TO LIVE IN A
NEW CONSTRUCTION CONDO AND I
ALSO THINK THAT IT'S SOMEWHAT
DISINGENUOUS TO SAY AND WE
ACTUALLY DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN DECADES IN THE
FUTURE RIGHT.
>> THAT JUST SIMPLY TRUST ME IN
FIFTY YEARS MAYBE THIS WILL BE
AFFORDABLE.
>> SO ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
DID YOU GET WHAT YOU NEEDED
COMMISSIONER KNOW THIS PLEASE.
WHATEVER YOU FIND AND WOULD
LIKE TO SHARE PLEASE.
>> THAT WOULD BE HELPFUL.
ABSOLUTELY.
ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE'LL MOVE ON TO AGENDA ITEM
NUMBER SEVEN THE MANAGERS
RUSSKIS MADE THE PUBLIC
HEARINGS SCHEDULED FOR THE NEXT
BUSINESS MEETING MANAGER LAINER
ONE PLUS ONE ITEM.
IT'S GOING TO BE A PUBLIC
HEARING AT OUR NEXT BUSINESS
MEETING THAT IS TWENTY EIGHT
FORTY FIVE STAR STATE THE ARPA
S PLAN FOR PLANNING COMMISSION
APPROVAL.
THIS IS A PROPOSAL TO CONSTRUCT
APPROXIMATELY 15 BUILDINGS IN
THE DOWNTOWN STYLE
OF DEVELOPMENT AROUND TWO
EXISTING BUILDINGS AT SEVEN
SEVEN SEVEN AND SEVEN EIGHT
NINE EAST EISENHOWER BOULEVARD
NEW PARK NEW BUILDINGS INCLUDE
A HOTEL EIGHT RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS, RESTAURANT BUILDINGS
AND THREE PARKING STRUCTURES.
THE DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
NINETY THREE THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET OF NEW
COMMERCIAL SPACE APPROXIMATELY
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY HOTEL ROOMS
APPROXIMATELY EIGHT HUNDRED AND
FORTY APARTMENTS OR CONDOMINIUM
UNITS INCLUDING TWO HUNDRED AND
THIRTY AFFORDABLE UNITS AND
APPROXIMATELY TWO THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED VEHICLE PARKING SPACES.
CONSTRUCTION IS PLANNED IN FIVE
PHASES ON THIS TWENTY THREE
POINT FIVE ACRE SITE THE T C
ONE.
>> THANK YOU MR. LEONARD.
WE'LL MOVE ON TO AGENDA ITEM
EIGHT A UNFINISHED BUSINESS
THERE IS NONE ANTA AGENDA ITEM
NINE REGULAR BUSINESS THERE IS
NONE ANTA AGENDA ITEM NUMBER
TEN OTHER BUSINESS THERE ARE
THINGS UNDER OTHER BUSINESS AND
SO I WILL START WITH STAFF
INTRODUCTION.
YEAH I'D LIKE TO INVITE OUR
COLLEAGUES.
WE HAVE SKYY STEWART, TROY
BOWMAN AND MOLLY JAESCHKE FROM
THE CITY PUBLIC SERVICES
DIVISION.
THEY ALSO HAVE SOME CONSULTANTS
WITH THEM AND SO YOU WILL
RECALL THAT WE PRESENTED YOU A
SUMMARY MEMO WITH SOME OF THE
PAST ANALYSIS THAT'S BEEN DONE
ABOUT SOME OF OUR UTILITY
TREATMENT FACILITIES THIS SAME
TEAM IS IN THE WORKS RIGHT NOW
DOING A LOT OF ANALYSIS OF SOME
OF OUR INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS
CORRESPONDING WITH THOSE.
AND SO WE WANTED TO PROVIDE
THEM AN OPPORTUNITY TO ADDRESS
ANY QUESTIONS AND AN OVERVIEW
OF SOME OF THE WORK THAT'S
GOING ON IN THAT REGARD.
NEXT UP AFTER THAT, WE'LL ALSO
HAVE A BRIEF OPPORTUNITY FOR
QUESTIONS WITH THEM AFTER THAT
WE'LL BE INTRODUCING GIANT, THE
CITY'S NEW ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR WHO WILL BE JUST
TALKING A LITTLE BIT ABOUT HIS
PERSPECTIVE, SOME OF THE TASKS
THAT HE'S BEEN SET FORTH WITH.
A LOT OF THIS WILL BE VERY
FAMILIAR WITH YOU TO YOU FROM
THE NEW APPROACH TO ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT REPORT AND JUST THE
INVESTMENT IN THAT DEPARTMENT
AND ALTHOUGH INCLUDED ON THE
AGENDA WE WILL NOT HAVE A
PRESENTATION FROM THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY BECAUSE IT IS
A TWO ZERO WEEKEND.
THEY ARE VERY, VERY BUSY.
THANK YOU, MR. THIS GUY
.
MY APOLOGIES.
GIVE US A MINUTE.
I FEEL TOO SURE THAT'S FINE.
LET'S JUST TAKE A SHORT RECESS
FOR TWO MINUTES
.
YOU HAVE THE FLOOR AND WELCOME.
YEAH.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO SPEAK WITH YOU THIS EVENING.
MY NAME IS SKYE STEWART.
I'M THE CHIEF OF STAFF FOR THE
PUBLIC SERVICES AREA.
I MANAGE THE SYSTEMS PLANNING
UNIT WHICH LEADS THE UTILITY
INFRASTRUCTURE PLANNING FOR THE
CITY.
I'M JOINED TONIGHT BY SYSTEMS
PLANNING UTILITY ENGINEER TROY
BOWMAN WATER TREATMENT PLANT
MANAGER MOLLY MOCHIZUKI AS WELL
AS A FEW OF OUR CONSULTANT
ENGINEERING PARTNERS AND
ADVISORS WHO ARE WORKING WITH
US ON UTILITY STUDIES TO HELP
US BETTER UNDERSTAND WHAT
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS EXIST AND
OUR WATER DISTRIBUTION AND
COLLECTION SYSTEMS TODAY AND
WHAT IMPROVEMENTS ARE NEEDED TO
CONTINUE TO PROVIDE FOR OUR
EXISTING CUSTOMERS AND SUPPORT
FUTURE GROWTH
PLANNING MANAGER
LEINERT RECENTLY SHARED A MEMO
WITH THE PLANNING COMMISSION
THAT PROVIDES AN EVALUATION
OF THE WATER AND WASTEWATER
TREATMENT PLANT CAPACITIES
UNDER VARIOUS GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS.
I'LL REVIEW THE HIGHLIGHTS
OF THAT MEMO AND ALSO SHARE A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THE OTHER
UTILITY PLANNING EFFORTS
CURRENTLY UNDERWAY THAT CAN
INFORM THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN.
FIRST I'LL PROVIDE A QUICK
ORIENTATION OR REFRESHER OF THE
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE WATER
UTILITY SYSTEM.
I'LL REVIEW THE GROWTH AND
BUILD OUT SCENARIOS THAT WE'RE
USING FOR THE UTILITY
INFRASTRUCTURE MODELING FOR
THESE STUDIES AND THEN I'LL
SUMMARIZE WHERE WE ARE WITH THE
PLANNING EFFORTS AND WHAT
CONSTRAINTS WILL NEED TO BE
CONSIDERED AND THEN I'LL OPEN
FOR QUESTIONS.
SO AS A QUICK ORIENTATION OR
REFRESHER TO THE DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE WATER UTILITY
SYSTEM WE'RE DISCUSSING TODAY
AND IT'S MOST SIMPLISTIC WAY I
LIKE TO THINK ABOUT THE WATER
SYSTEM AS MOVING THROUGH THE
CITY FROM THE NORTHWEST TO THE
SOUTHEAST GENERALLY ALONG THE
PATH OF THE HURON RIVER.
SO BEGINNING THE BEGINNING
OF OUR WATER SYSTEM STARTS WITH
OUR SOURCE WATER.
THAT'S WHERE WE GET OUR WATER
PRIMARILY MOST OF OUR WATER
COMES FROM THE HURON RIVER BUT
WE ALSO GET WATER FROM GROUND
WELLS A LITTLE SOUTH OF TOWN
NEAR THE ANN ARBOR AIRPORT.
THAT SOURCE WATER IS SENT
THROUGH PIPES TO THE WATER
TREATMENT PLANT THAT IS AT THE
TREATMENT PLANT.
THAT IS WHERE WE CLEAN AND
TREAT THE WATER TO MAKE SURE
IT'S SAFE FOR DRINKING AND FROM
THERE IT ENTERS INTO THE
TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM THAT'S A NETWORK
OF PIPES AND STORAGE TANKS AND
PUMP STATIONS THAT GET THE
WATER FROM THE TREATMENT PLANT
TO OUR CUSTOMERS TO USE IN
THEIR HOMES BUSINESSES ACROSS
OUR SERVICE AREA.
THEN THE WATER IS USED IN THE
DOMESTIC AND BUSINESS USES IN
ALL THE WAYS YOU CAN IMAGINE
FROM THERE THE NETWORK OF PIPES
COLLECTING ALL THE WATER FROM
DISHWASHERS, WASHING MACHINES,
SHOWERS, TOILETS, NEW PIPES THE
SANITARY COLLECTION SYSTEM
PIPES CARRY THAT WASTEWATER TO
THE WATER RESOURCE
RECOVERY FACILITY OR THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT TO
BE TREATED AND ULTIMATELY
RETURNED TO THE HERON RIVER
SOUTHEAST OF TOWN.
EACH PART OF THE SYSTEM HAS ITS
OWN INFRASTRUCTURE, ITS OWN
CONSTRAINTS AND INVESTMENT
NEEDS.
THE MEMO FOCUS SPECIFICALLY ON
THE PLANT CAPACITIES AT THE
WATER TREATMENT PLANT IN THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.
BUT OTHER STUDIES ARE UNDERWAY
WITH THE BROADER SCOPE.
I WILL NOTE THAT TONIGHT
STORMWATER SYSTEM IS NOT A PART
OF THE SPECIFIC DISCUSSION OR
THE ANALYSIS WE'RE GOING TO BE
TALKING ABOUT TODAY.
BUT I WILL NOTE THAT MAJOR
STORM EVENTS DO HAVE ACUTE
IMPACTS ON OUR SANITARY SYSTEM
.
>> SO ON THE DRINKING WATER
SIDE, THE PLANNING FOR THE
REPLACEMENT OF THE OLDEST
PORTION OF THE WATER TREATMENT
PLANT WE CALL PLANT ONE BEGAN
IN TWENTY TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
IT'S NEARLY ONE HUNDRED YEARS
OLD AND IT'S REACHING THE END
OF ITS USEFUL LIFE.
THESE ARE LONG COMPLEX PLANNING
PROCESSES AND OUT OF THAT
PROCESS HAS COME THE WATER
FACILITIES PLAN.
IT CAME IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
AND THAT USED LONG TERM GROWTH
PROJECTIONS FROM SOME KOG WHICH
THE SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN COUNCIL
GOVERNMENTS AND USING THAT
INFORMATION AND IT RESULTED IN
THE DETERMINATION THAT THE
EXISTING PLANT CAPACITY WAS
SUFFICIENT FOR A 50 YEAR
HORIZON
WHICH IS A TYPICAL
PLANNING HORIZON FOR MAJOR
PLANT PROJECTS.
THIS PLANNING FOR THE
REPLACEMENT OF PLANT ONE IS
UNDERWAY NOW AT A TENTATIVE
SCHEDULE IS THAT THAT
CONSTRUCTION WOULD START AROUND
TWENTY THIRTY AND HOPEFULLY
FINISH BY TWENTY THIRTY FIVE
BEGINNING IN TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR.
WE ALSO BEGAN A WATER
DISTRIBUTION PLAN UPDATE TO
IDENTIFY THE NEEDED
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE
TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION
PIPE NETWORK MORE THAN FIVE
HUNDRED MILES OF PIPES
UNDERGROUND.
THIS PROJECT IS ANTICIPATED TO
BE COMPLETE BY THE END OF THIS
YEAR.
THE HYDRAULIC MODEL HAS BEEN
UPDATED AND IS BEING USED TO
EVALUATE THE DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM UNDER BOTH EXISTING
CONDITIONS AND ALSO ANTICIPATED
FUTURE CONDITIONS WHICH
INCORPORATE A COUPLE OF THE
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BUILD OUT
SCENARIOS CONTEMPLATED AND THE
DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE LATEST PLAN
RECOMMENDED SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS
AND ASSOCIATED COST ESTIMATES
WILL BE DEVELOPED BASED ON THE
FINDINGS OF THIS THESE
HYDRAULIC ANALYZES.
SO THIS IS A MAP OF OUR SERVICE
AREA FOR THE WATER DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM.
YOU'LL NOTICE IT EXTENDS BEYOND
THE CITY BOUNDARIES.
WE ALSO HAVE CUSTOMERS TOWNSHIP
AND ARABA TOWNSHIP BOTH
OF THESE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS HAVE
CONTRACTS THAT INCLUDE
RESERVATION OF WATER CAPACITY
AND CONTRACT LIMITS FOR MAXIMUM
DAILY DEMAND DAILY USE IN THE
MEMO THAT WE SHARED WITH
PLANNING COMMISSION ON THE
PLANT CAPACITY WE FOCUSED
SPECIFICALLY ON THE DAILY
TREATMENT CAPACITIES OF BOTH
THE DRINKING WATER TREATMENT
PLANT AND THE WATER RESOURCE
RECOVERY FACILITY OR THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.
YOU'LL HEAR ME SAY BOTH THERE
ARE DIFFERENT PEOPLE WHO HAVE
WHO LIKE THE DIFFERENT PHRASES
SO WE USE BOTH THE GROWTH
SCENARIOS MODELED IN THIS MEMO
INCLUDED TO BUILD OUT SCENARIOS
INFORMED BY OUR DISCUSSIONS
WITH THE PLANNING STAFF AND
THEY WERE USED TO ESTIMATE
FUTURE WATER DEMANDS AND ICE
WATER FLOWS BASED ON
ANTICIPATED POPULATION
INCREASES.
THESE ARE ALSO COMPARED TO SOME
COGS MORE MODEST LONG TERM
GROWTH PROJECTIONS.
SO YOU'LL SEE HERE THE SAME KOG
ANNUAL INCREASE WAS AROUND TWO
HUNDRED UNITS PER YEAR AND TO
TWENTY TWENTY FIFTY THAT'LL BE
ABOUT A NINE PERCENT INCREASE
IN POPULATION.
THE LOW END BUILDOUT SCENARIO
CONTEMPLATED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN IS
AROUND TWELVE HUNDRED UNITS PER
YEAR WITH AN INCREASE OF ABOUT
SIXTY SIX THOUSAND OR FIFTY TWO
PER CENT INCREASE IN POPULATION
AND THEN THE HIGH END IS ABOUT
EIGHTEEN HUNDRED UNITS PER YEAR
WITH A NINETY NINE THOUSAND
PERSON INCREASE IN POPULATION
ABOUT 80 PERCENT.
WE DO KNOW THAT PER THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT IN THE MOST
RECENT FEW YEARS THE ACTUAL
UNIT COUNT HAS BEEN CLOSER TO
AROUND SIX HUNDRED OR SIX
HUNDRED FIFTY UNITS PER YEAR IN
THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS
.
OK SO HERE IS THIS ONE OF THE
CHARTS THAT MIGHT BE FAMILIAR
TO YOU FROM THE MEMO AND THIS
IS OUTLINING BOTH THE 80
PERCENT CAPACITY LINE AND THE
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT CAPACITY
OF THE EXISTING WATER TREATMENT
PLANT AND IT HAS THE SERVICE
AREA POPULATION AS THE Y AXIS
AND TIME AS THE X AXIS AND IT
SHOWS THE THREE DIFFERENT
GROWTH SCENARIOS.
THE MORE FLAT LINE IS THE
SIMCOCK POPULATION PROJECTIONS
WHICH YOU CAN SEE WOULD BE
ANTICIPATED DURING THAT TWENTY
FIFTEEN TIME HORIZON TO STAY
UNDER THE EIGHTY PERCENT
THRESHOLD.
THE EIGHTY PERCENT THRESHOLD IS
IMPORTANT HERE BECAUSE THAT IS
WHEN EGLE OUR REGULATOR IS
SAYING WHAT IS YOUR PLAN FOR
EXPANSION?
YOU SEEM TO BE GETTING CLOSE TO
THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF CAPACITY
YOU HAVE.
SO WHERE ARE YOU GOING TO GET
ADDITIONAL WATER?
HOW ARE YOU GOING TO TREAT IT?
AND SO IN THE BOTH THE LOW AND
HIGH END SCENARIOS THAT WE
EXCEED THAT 80 PERCENT IN THE
RELATIVELY NEAR FUTURE IF WE
WERE TO DENSIFY ON A LINEAR
BASIS SO THAT AT TWENTY THIRTY
FOUR ON THE HIGH END OR TWENTY
EIGHT ON THE LOW END
DEVELOPMENT SCENARIO BUT YOU
CAN SEE HERE THERE IS ROOM FOR
GROWTH BUT THE INTENSITY AND
THE PACE WILL HAVE MAJOR IMPACT
ON THE NEEDED INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> SO AT THE TREATMENT PLANT
THERE ARE CONSTRAINTS THE
FUTURE DEMANDS EXPECTED ARE
EXPECTED TO EXCUSE ME FUTURE
DEMANDS ARE EXPECTED TO EXCEED
THE CURRENT AND PLANNED
TREATMENT CAPACITY BASED ON
THOSE LOW AND HIGH END BUILDOUT
PROJECTION SCENARIOS.
THE EXISTING WATER TREATMENT
PLANT IS A LANDLOCK SITE AND
THAT CANNOT SUPPORT ADDITIONAL
CAPACITY ON THAT LOCATION
PLANNING.
AS I MENTIONED BEFORE, THE
PLANNING FOR PLANT ONE
REPLACEMENT HAS BEEN UNDERWAY
FOR YEARS AND IS BASED ON THAT
CURRENT CAPACITY AND THAT
CURRENT LOCATION.
I WOULD LIKE TO REITERATE HERE
THAT THE MAJOR INVESTMENTS
REQUIRED FOR THE PLANT ONE ARE
REQUIRED REGARDLESS OF GROWTH.
AGAIN THAT IS THAT IS NEARLY
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FACILITY.
BUT BEYOND JUST HOW MUCH WATER
CAN WE TREAT, WE ALSO HAVE SOME
SOURCE WATER CONSTRAINTS.
EIGHTY FIVE PERCENT OF OUR
WATER COMES FROM THE HURON
RIVER AND ABOUT FIFTEEN PERCENT
COMES FROM WELLS AT STEYR FARM
WHICH IS NEAR THE ANN ARBOR
AIRPORT.
WE ARE NOT PERMITTED TO
WITHDRAW MORE WATER FROM THE
HURON RIVER.
WE ARE LIMITED TO FORTY MILLION
GALLONS A DAY TO MAINTAIN THE
FLOW OF THE RIVER DURING
DROUGHT CONDITIONS AND THAT'S
MANDATED BY EAGLE.
SO THE FUTURE DEMANDS IN THESE
HIGH AND LOW END TO BUILD OUT
SCENARIOS DO EXPECT TO EXCEED
THOSE AVAILABLE SOURCE WATER
THAT AVAILABLE SOURCE WATER SO
ADDITIONAL SUPPLY WOULD BE
REQUIRED WHETHER THAT'S A NEW
WELL FIELD WITH ADDITIONAL
TREATMENT OR REGIONAL
CONNECTION AND THEN TO THE
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
BEYOND THE SOURCE WATER AND
TREATMENT PLANT CAPACITIES
WE'RE EVALUATING THE THE
EXISTING AND FUTURE DEMAND
OF THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
THESE IMPROVEMENTS WILL BE
FOCUSED ON ENSURING ADEQUATE
WATER QUALITY THROUGHOUT THE
PIPE NETWORK AS WELL AS
PRESSURE AND FIRE FLOW
CAPACITY.
THE QUESTIONS WE'RE ASKING
THERE ARE WHERE IS UPSIZING
NEEDED TO SUPPORT ADDITIONAL
DEVELOPMENT?
HOW MUCH BIGGER DO THOSE PIPES
NEED TO BE TO SUPPORT THAT
GROWTH?
THE RESULTS OF THIS ANALYSIS
WILL BE COMPLETE BY THE END
OF THE YEAR AND AS A NOTE THE
WE ANTICIPATE THAT ADDITIONAL
FINISHED WATER STORAGE WILL BE
NEEDED.
ADDITIONAL PUMP STATIONS ARE
LIKELY NEEDED AND I WILL NOTE
HERE THAT ADDITIONAL GROWTH FOR
OUR CONTRACT CUSTOMERS CYO
TOWNSHIP AND OUR TOWNSHIP ARE
NOT INCORPORATED INTO THIS
ANALYSIS AT THIS TIME.
HOWEVER, THE ISSUE OF GROWTH
PROJECTIONS ARE INCLUDED IN ALL
OF THESE STUDIES.
WE'RE CLOSELY COORDINATING WITH
THEM AS PART OF THEIR CAMPUS
TUFTY PLANNING EFFORTS.
SO SWITCHING NOW TO THE OTHER
SIDE SO THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
TOILET EVEN SO THAT'S THE
SANITARY COLLECTION SYSTEM.
SO THIS THE SANITARY SEWER
COLLECTION SYSTEM COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN IS EFFORT THAT BEGAN IN
AUGUST EXCUSE ME OCTOBER OF
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AND IS
ANTICIPATED TO BE COMPLETE IN
EARLY TWENTY TWENTY SIX.
IT'S FOCUSED ON THE MORE THAN
THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY MILES
OF SANITARY MAINS AND TRUNK
LINES UNDER OUR STREETS.
WE'RE CURRENTLY PERFORMING
HYDRAULIC MODEL UPDATE
PERFORMING HYDRAULIC MODEL
UPDATES BASED ON RECENTLY
COLLECTED FLOW METERING DATA SO
ACTUAL REAL DATA IN THE FIELD
AND ONCE THAT MODEL HAS BEEN
UPDATED IT WILL BE USED TO
IDENTIFY A SANITARY SEWER
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS UNDER BOTH
EXISTING CONDITIONS AND
ANTICIPATED FUTURE CONDITIONS
WHICH WILL INCORPORATE BOTH
OF THOSE TO BUILD OUT SCENARIOS
.
RECOMMENDED SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS
AND ASSOCIATED COST ESTIMATES
WILL BE DEVELOPED BASED ON THE
FINDINGS OF THAT HYDRAULIC
ANALYSIS LIKE THE WATER SYSTEM,
THE SERVICE AREA FOR THE
SANITARY COLLECTION SYSTEM
EXTENDS BEYOND THE CITY
BOUNDARIES.
WE ALSO PROVIDE SERVICE TO CYTO
TOWNSHIP ANN ARBOR TOWNSHIP AND
PITTSVILLE TOWNSHIP AGAIN THEY
HAVE CONTRACTS WITH MAXIMUM
DAILY FLOWS SO VERY SIMILAR TO
WHAT YOU SAW ON THE WATER
TREATMENT SIDE.
THIS IS THE WASTEWATER
TREATMENT PLANT EXPANSION.
YOU CAN SEE AGAIN THERE'S ROOM
FOR GROWTH.
WE HAVE THE EIGHTY PERCENT RED
LINE AND ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
CAPACITY BLACK LINE AND THE
SIMCOCK MODEST GROWTH
PROJECTIONS ARE WELL UNDER THAT
80 PERCENT AND THE HIGHER
INTENSITY DEVELOPMENT WE'LL
CROSS THAT 80 PERCENT THRESHOLD
A LITTLE FURTHER OUT THAN THE
WATER ON THE WATER SIDE.
BUT WHAT I WILL NOTE HERE IS
THIS IS DRY WEATHER FLOW ONLY
AND AS I TALK AS I MENTIONED
EARLIER, WE DO DURING LARGE
STORM EVENTS THERE ARE MAJOR
IMPACTS TO PARTICULARLY THOSE
LARGE TRUNK LINES AND THE WATER
TREATMENT PLANT SO THAT WET
WEATHER ANALYSIS IS UNDERWAY
RIGHT NOW.
AS I SAID, WE'RE DOING A LOT
OF FLOW METERING, COLLECTING
AND UPDATING THE HYDRAULIC
MODEL AND THAT'S GOING TO HELP
US BE ABLE TO DO THE SAME
ANALYSIS ON THE WET WEATHER
SIDE.
WE ARE ACTIVELY LOOKING AT THAT
WET WEATHER CAPACITY NOW AND
THAT IS WHAT'S GOING TO
ULTIMATELY DRIVE IT
IMPROVEMENTS THAT WILL BE
NEEDED.
SO FOR THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT CAPACITY IS AVAILABLE TO
ACCOMMODATE THE PROJECTED
FUTURE GROWTH UNDER DRY WEATHER
CONDITIONS.
THAT'S GOOD NEWS .
THERE IS LIMITED CAPACITY TO
ACCOMMODATE PEAK WEATHER FLOWS
UNDER EXISTING AND FUTURE
CONDITIONS.
WE ALREADY SEE SOME STORMS THAT
PUT STRAIN ON PARTS OF OUR
COLLECTION SYSTEM AND PARTS
OF OUR TREATMENT SYSTEM.
DEPENDING ON THE SIZE THERE'S
ALWAYS A BIGGER STORM YOU CAN
DESIGN PIPES FOR ANY SIZE AND
THERE'S ALWAYS A BIGGER STORM.
THE EXISTING LANDLOCK SITE IS
ALSO A LITTLE BIT OF A
CHALLENGE HERE BECAUSE IT CAN'T
SUPPORT SIGNIFICANT ADDITIONAL
CAPACITY.
IT IS LANDLOCKED BY A RAILROAD
AND THE HURON RIVER AND IT'S
ALSO NOT IN THE CITY LIMITS.
SO ON THE COLLECTION SYSTEM
SIDE AGAIN THE PIPES UNDER THE
ROAD THIS IS THE LOCAL PIPES IN
THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD AND THE
LARGER INTERCEPTORS OR TRUNK
LINES THAT CARRY THAT COLLECT
ALL OF THOSE ALL THAT FLOW FROM
YOUR LOCAL PIPES AND CARRY IT
TO THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT.
THE EXISTING THERE ARE EXISTING
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS DURING WET
WEATHER EVENTS THAT WE ARE
AWARE OF AND SO WE ARE LOOKING
THE QUESTIONS ARE ASKING IN
THIS STUDY IS WHERE DO WE
EXPECT TO SEE ADDITIONAL FLOWS
EXACERBATE CAPACITY ISSUES AND
POTENTIALLY COST ASO'S OR
BASEMENT BACKUPS DURING MAJOR
STORM EVENTS?
AND SO HOW WILL WE ADDRESS
THOSE ISSUES?
WILL WE BUILD ANOTHER PIPE AND
IF WE BUILD ANOTHER PIPE, CAN
THE TREATMENT PLANT TREAT IT IF
WE CAN GET IT THERE?
SO THOSE ARE THE KINDS
OF QUESTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS
THAT WE ARE LOOKING AT IN THESE
DIFFERENT
STUDIES.
SO TRY TO KEEP THIS REALLY HIGH
LEVEL.
YOU CAN GO REALLY DEEP INTO THE
WEEDS REALLY QUICKLY.
BUT THE TAKEAWAY IS HERE IS
THAT THERE ARE EXISTING
CONSTRAINTS IN OUR UTILITY
SYSTEMS THIS WE DON'T HAVE ALL
THE ANSWERS TO EVERY SINGLE ONE
OF THOSE CONSTRAINTS.
THAT ANALYSIS WILL CONTINUE.
THERE IS CAPACITY FOR GROWTH
BUT IT WILL DRIVE THE NEED FOR
MAJOR INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS PARTICULARLY LIKE
WHEN WE THINK ABOUT THE
INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT AND
FUNDING STRATEGIES WILL BE
NEEDED SO THE CURRENT WAY THAT
WE PLAN FOR REPAIRS OR
REPLACEMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS TO
OUR EXISTING SYSTEM CANNINESS
NECESSARILY FUND ALL FUTURE
NEEDS.
SO WE HAVE A LITTLE TABLE HERE
THAT SORT OF HIGHLIGHTS AGAIN
THAT THERE ARE MAJOR
CONSTRAINTS ON THE SOURCE WATER
SIDE ON THE DISTRIBUTION AND
COLLECTION SIDE THERE ARE
CONSTRAINTS BUT ANALYSIS IS IN
PROGRESS AND THEN ON THE
TREATMENT SIDE WE KNOW THERE
ARE CONSTRAINTS ON THE WATER
SIDE BUT WE BELIEVE THAT
ANALYSIS IS NEEDED ON THE
SANITARY WASTEWATER SIDE AND
WITH THAT I'LL TAKE QUESTIONS.
GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
PRESENTATION.
WHO WOULD LIKE TO HAVE STARTED
OK, COMMISSIONER ADAMS THANKS
VERY MUCH.
BY THE WAY, THAT IS REALLY
GREAT.
I HAD A QUESTION ABOUT THE
BENCHMARK TO COMPARE THOSE
GROWTH RATES AGAINST YOUR TWO
CHARTS.
>> COMPARE THE HIGH AND LOW YOU
KNOW THE RANGES OF KIND
OF WHERE WE EXPECT TO GO
DEPENDING ON HOW THE PLAN TAKES
SHAPE AND HOW IT'S IMPLEMENTED
AGAINST A SIM CARD RATE THAT WE
KNOW FROM PLANNING DATA IS NOT
ACCURATE.
IT'S OFF BY FOUR HUNDRED
PERCENT COMPARED TO THE RATE
THAT WE'RE SEEING TODAY.
LOOK, WHAT'S THE RIGHT WAY TO
BECAUSE I GUESS MY INITIAL
REACTION WAS WE'RE GOING TO BE
IN THE SAME WOULD BE FACING A
LOT OF THE SAME CONSTRAINTS
FIVE TO TEN YEARS LIKE ALL THAT
ALL THESE NUMBERS DO THE TWELVE
HUNDRED OF THE EIGHTEEN HUNDRED
IS MAYBE MOVE THE LINE FORWARD
FIVE TO TEN YEARS WE'RE GOING
TO BE SEEING THE SAME PROBLEMS
AT A REASONABLE OR SIMILAR TIME
SCALE IF EIGHT FIFTY IS THE
NUMBER INSTEAD OF TWO HUNDRED
WHICH WE HAVE REASON TO BELIEVE
850 IS THE NUMBER BECAUSE
THAT'S HOW WE'RE BUILDING TODAY
.
>> I MEAN WHAT'S YOUR REACTION
TO THAT?
YEAH I WILL SAY THE SECOND
GROWTH PROJECTIONS THAT WERE
USED IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO WAS
AT A DIFFERENT MOMENT WHERE WE
WERE NOT BUILDING CONSISTENTLY
AT THAT RATE AND SO THAT I
UNDERSTAND I TOTALLY AGREE THAT
WE ARE BUILDING AT A HIGHER
RATE RIGHT NOW BUT WE ALSO KNOW
THAT DEVELOPMENT ISN'T LINEAR
AND SO A LOT OF THIS IS MAKING
SOME ASSUMPTIONS AND GUESSES
ABOUT THE INTENSITY OF A
DEVELOPMENT AND HOW THAT WILL
HAPPEN.
BUT YES, YOU ARE RIGHT THERE
ARE LIMITED THERE ARE CAPACITY
CONSTRAINTS IN ALL SCENARIOS.
>> YOU HAVE A SENSE ROUGHLY FOR
HOW IT MOVES THE TIME SCALE TO
JUST PROJECT OUT THE FIFTY.
>> I MEAN IF YOU DON'T KNOW
THAT'S FINE.
YEAH, I DON'T THINK WE HAVE
DONE THE ANALYSIS.
WE COULD LOOK INTO THAT BUT WE
HAVE NOT DONE AT EIGHT FIFTY
FIFTY WITHOUT GETTING THE DECK
ATTACHED TO THE AGENDA OR
SUBMITTED AS A DOCUMENT WOULD
IT BE POSSIBLE TO HAVE THOSE
CHARTS UPDATED WITH THE FIFTY
SO THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY SEE
THAT THOSE RATES MODELED
AGAINST WHAT WE KNOW TO BE THE
ACTUAL RATE OF INCREASE WE
WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO DO THAT
FOR THIS BUT WE COULD DO THAT
WE COULD WORK WITH OUR BE TO
WORK ON THAT ANALYSIS.
YEAH, I THINK MR. LEONARD SAID
THE NUMBER WAS SIX FIFTY SORRY
SIX IS IT SIX HUNDRED FIFTY MY
EYES ARE OFF.
THAT'S OK.
SIX WAS EIGHT HUNDRED.
IT'S A MODEL THAT I SAID OK SO
SIX GOT IT THANKS.
>> YEAH.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
THANK YOU.
I DIDN'T SEE I CAN THANK YOU
FOR THIS REALLY GOOD
PRESENTATION I HAVE JUST LIKE
REALLY HYPER SPECIFIC QUESTIONS
AS YOU WERE GOING THROUGH ON
THE WHAT WATER TREATMENT SIDE
WHERE COULD WE ARE YOU HAVE YOU
BEEN LOOKING INTO WHERE WE
COULD BE EXPANDING CAPACITY
SINCE IT SOUNDS LIKE WE CANNOT
EXPAND IT TO THE CURRENT SITE?
WOULD IT BE A SECOND PLANT
SOMEWHERE ALONG THE HI MOLLY
MOCHIZUKI WATER TREATMENT
SERVICES MANAGER.
SO TWO THINGS WE NEED TO LOOK
FIRST AT THE TREATMENT PLANT
AND SO YES WE ARE SPACE LIMITED
AS YOU CAN SEE THERE IS THAT
NICE GREEN GRASSY AREA THAT
LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE ALL SORTS
OF SPACE THAT'S ACTUALLY A SIX
MILLION GALLON UNDERGROUND
STORAGE RESERVOIR.
SO WE CANNOT BUILD ON TOP
OF THAT.
WE HAVE LOOKED AT DIFFERENT
TYPES OF TREATMENT.
WHAT COULD WE FIT IN THIS
FOOTPRINT?
BUT NOTHING HAS SHOWN THAT WE
CAN ACTUALLY EXPAND CAPACITY.
SO WE WOULD NEED TO LOOK AT A
WHOLE NEW LOCATION AS FAR AS
SOURCE WE KNOW THAT WE'RE
LIMITED STEER FARM AND WE'RE
LIMITED TO THE RIVER.
SO WE WOULD NEED TO LOOK
PROBABLY TO THE NORTH FOR
ADDITIONAL WELL CAPACITY OR
AGAIN CONSIDER CONNECTION TO A
REGIONAL SYSTEM.
>> YOU JUST SEGUE INTO MY NEXT
QUESTION AT WHAT POINT AND
MAYBE WE MISSED THIS MAYBE GUY
YOU SAID IT BUT AT WHAT POINT
IN THAT TRAJECTORY DO WE RUN
INTO SOURCE WATER CONSTRAINED?
IT'S THE MIMICS THE TREATMENT
THAT YES, THEY ARE DESIGNED THE
SAME.
WE HAVE A LITTLE ADDITIONAL
CAPACITY THAT WE BELIEVE THAT
WE COULD GET OUT OF THE WELL
FIELD TO THE SOUTH AT THE
AIRPORT AND I TALKED ABOUT SORT
OF THE CAPITAL INVESTMENTS THAT
NEEDED BUT IT WOULD STILL ONLY
GET US TO THAT THE TREATMENT
THE EXISTING TREATMENT PLANT
CAPACITY.
>> SO OK AND THEN GOING BACK TO
MY WE WOULD NEED A SECOND SIGHT
QUESTION.
IT SOUNDS LIKE THIS THE CURRENT
ONE IS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS.
YES.
WASTEWATER IS OUTSIDE OF CITY
LIMITS.
YES.
COULD A NEW DRINKING WATER
TREATMENT PLANT BE OUTSIDE
OF CITY LIMITS?
IS THERE ANY SORT
OF CONSTRAINTS THAT IT COULD NO
OTHER WORKING WITH OUR
NEIGHBORS?
YES.
NO.
>> OK, AND THEN MY LAST
QUESTION WHEN YOU SAY DRY
WEATHER VERSUS WET WEATHER, CAN
YOU JUST ONE OF YOU TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT THAT
MEANS?
YES, GOOD EVENING.
I'M TROY BOCKMAN.
I'M AN ENGINEER WITH OUR
SYSTEMS PLANNING UNIT.
WHEN WE REFER TO DRY WEATHER
IT'S LIKE A DAY LIKE TODAY
WE'RE JUST VERY DRY OUTSIDE THE
FLOWS THAT WE WOULD SEE IN THE
SEWER PIPES ARE REALLY JUST
COMING FROM, YOU KNOW, YOUR
SINKS OR TOILETS OR STUFF LIKE
THAT SOME GROUND WATER
INFILTRATION.
BUT DURING HEAVY RAIN EVENTS,
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, STORMWATER
DOES MAKE ITS WAY INTO THE
PIPES WHETHER THAT BE THROUGH
CRACKS, LEAKS, YOU KNOW,
PONDING OF WATER OVER TOP OF A
MANHOLE CONNECTED FOUNDATION
DRAINS IS ANOTHER MAJOR SOURCE.
BUT THAT'S WHEN WE REFER TO AS
WET WEATHER.
THE FLOWS THAT WE SEE IN THE
PIPES DURING A MAJOR STORM
EVENT AND THAT'S WHAT WE
STRUGGLE TO DURING LIKE A
TYPICAL MINOR YOU KNOW, IT'S
TYPICAL ANYMORE DURING LIKE A
LIGHT RAIN FOR EXAMPLE.
YEAH, WATER PROBABLY WOULDN'T
BE GETTING INTO THE PIPES.
>> IT'S STILL IT'S STILL WET.
WE DO NOTICE WHEN YOU'RE DOING
DRY WEATHER ANALYSIS YOU'RE
JUST ASSUMING THAT IT'S A
COMPLETELY DRY DAY AND NOT
REALLY TAKING INTO ACCOUNT
WEATHER PATTERN.
CORRECT.
OK, BUT YOU'RE DOING ANALYSIS
FOR THE WET WEATHER TO LOOK
RIGHT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER NORDON.
OK, I'M GOING TO MAYBE BE A
LITTLE REPETITIVE BUT JUST SORT
OF MAKING SURE I'M
UNDERSTANDING IF I HEARD
CLEARLY ALL OF OUR SYSTEMS ARE
GOING TO NEED MAJOR UPGRADES
REGARDLESS.
IT'S AN AGING FACILITY.
>> AN AGING SYSTEM.
YEAH.
WE'RE GOING TO NEED TO DO IT.
THE QUESTION ON THE RIGHT
GROWTH RATE AND WHAT WE'RE
PLANNING FOR IS MORE A QUESTION
OF HOW SOON WE HAVE TO DO THAT
THAN IT IS HOW BIG THE PROJECT
NEEDS TO BE TO ACCOMMODATE THE
GROWTH THAT WE'RE EXPECTING OR
IS IT THE CASE WE'VE BEEN
GETTING FEEDBACK FROM CITIZENS
LIKE WE DON'T HAVE THE CAPACITY
TO DO THIS.
YOUR GROWTH EXPECTATIONS ARE
WAY OUT OF LINE AND WHO'S GOING
TO PAY FOR THAT AND THAT'S WHAT
I'M TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW
MUCH GIVEN THE DIFFERENT RATES
OF EXPECTED GROWTH AND WHAT IT
COULD BE, IS IT STILL WITHIN
THE REALM OF POSSIBILITY THAT
WE'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
ACCOMMODATE EVEN THE HIGH
GROWTH AND IS IT JUST A MATTER
OF THAT'S HAPPENING SOONER THAN
LATER OR IS IT REALLY GOING TO
PUSH US INTO MAJOR EXPENDITURES
THAT WE WOULDN'T OTHERWISE
EXPERIENCE BECAUSE WE'RE HAVING
HIGHER GROWTH RATES AND WHAT
WHAT FOLKS MIGHT WANT TO SEE IN
THE CITY?
>> DOES THAT MAKE SENSE?
AM I MAKING SENSE?
I THINK SO AT I'LL ATTEMPT TO
ANSWER IF IT'S NOT MAKING
SENSE.
I'M HAPPY TO HAVE IN THE PLANTS
THE CAPACITY THE TREATMENT
PLANT CAPACITY IS SORT OF SET
BOTH BY THE CURRENT SOURCE
WATER AND THE WHAT THE
TREATMENT PLANT IS DESIGNED TO
TREAT IN A LIKE THROUGH.
SO IF WE THINK WE'RE GOING TO
SURPASS THAT WE WILL ABSOLUTELY
NEED TO BE MAKING LIKE LOOKING
FOR OTHER LOCATIONS.
RIGHT.
WE HAVE TO MAKE THIS AT REPAIR
LIKE REPLACEMENT HERE TO
CONTINUE PROVIDING LIKE IRV'S
WHAT WE'RE CURRENTLY PROVIDING.
BUT TO GO BEYOND THAT WE WOULD
HAVE TO BE SEEKING OTHER
TREATMENT AND SOURCE AND WE'RE
EXPECTING TO GROW I MEAN EVEN
ON THE LOW END WE'RE STILL
GOING TO EVENTUALLY HAVE TO ADD
MORE CAPACITY I THINK ON THE
LOW END OF THE OF WHAT'S THE
BUILD YES.
THE SCENARIO WE WOULD NEED TO
BE LOOKING FOR THAT THIS THE
FUNDING FOR THIS IS A BIT
CHICKEN AND EGG.
IS THAT YOU YOU CAN'T BUILD IT
HOPING THEY WILL COME.
YOU NEED TO BUILD IT KNOWING
THEY WILL COME BECAUSE THEY
HAVE TO BUY INTO THE SYSTEM AND
PAY FOR IT.
WE WE CAN'T FUND FULL GROWTH.
WE CAN FUND IMPROVEMENTS AND
REPAIRS TO EXISTING SYSTEM WITH
UTILITY RATE DOLLARS.
YOU CAN'T FUND A SPECULATIVE
FUTURE GROWTH WITH UTILITY
DOLLARS.
SO THE FIRST STEP IS TO FIX THE
CURRENT SYSTEM.
THE NEXT STEP WILL BE TO
CAREFULLY PLAN TO FIGURE OUT
WHEN IS THE TIME COME THAT WE
NOW NEED TO START PLANNING FOR
EXPANSION TO ACCOMMODATE WHAT
GROWTH RATE SEEMS TO BE
HAPPENING.
IS THAT CORRECT?
THAT SOUNDS CORRECT.
WHICH IS A TRICKY THE
TRICKINESS OF THAT IN TERMS
OF SOURCE WATER YOU SAID WE'RE
LIMITED ON WHAT WE CAN WITHDRAW
FROM HERE ON RIVER.
ARE THERE SIMILAR CONSTRAINTS
ON WHAT WE COULD EVENTUALLY
TAKE OUT OF GROUNDWATER OR IS
IT JUST A MATTER OF FINDING A
NEW SITE TO SINK A WELL, IF I
CAN GO BACK TO YOUR LAST
QUESTION.
>> I JUST WANT TO EXPAND ON
WHAT SIZE A LITTLE BIT.
SO WE ARE IN THE PLANNING
STAGES TO REPLACE THAT OLDEST
PORTION OF THE PLANT AND SO WE
THAT'S A SIGNIFICANT INVESTMENT
AND WE WOULD WANT TO MAYBE
CONSIDER IF WE THINK THAT THE
FUTURE GROWTH IS COMING SOONER
TO CHANGE DIRECTION OR CONSIDER
THAT SOONER RATHER THAN BUILD A
NEW PLANT AND THEN BEFORE
AUGUST ANOTHER.
YEAH, BECAUSE EVERYTHING TAKES
A REALLY LONG TIME.
WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON THIS WE
ACTUALLY DID OUR FIRST
EVALUATION IN TWENTY FOURTEEN
AND THEN WE CAME BACK IN TWENTY
TWENTY ONE AND TOOK THIS TO
COUNCIL AGAIN AND ASKED THEM TO
LOOK AT THE OPTIONS THAT WE HAD
AT THE TABLE AT THAT TIME AND
THEY MADE A RECOMMENDATION TO
MOVE FORWARD WITH REPLACING THE
PLANT.
SO THAT SAID THAT JUST SHOWS
YOU HOW LONG THAT IT ALL TAKES
SO WE WOULD HOPEFULLY WANT TO
START THAT PROCESS SOONER
RATHER THAN LATER AS FAR AS
SOURCE WE DO KNOW WE'VE DONE
SOME INITIAL STUDIES DOWN AT
OUR EXISTING WELL FIELD AND WE
KNOW THAT WE ARE LIMITED DOWN
THERE.
WE CAN GET A LITTLE BIT MORE
LIKE I WAS SAYING EARLIER BUT
NOT A LOT MORE NOT MAYBE WHAT
WE WOULD NEED FOR THE THE HIGH
END, MAYBE NOT EVEN THE LOW
END.
SO THAT MEANS THAT WE NEED TO
LOOK SOMEWHERE AND WE KNOW WE
CAN'T LOOK WEST BECAUSE OF THE
GALMAN PLUME.
SO THAT HAS REALLY LIMITED US
IN OUR ABILITY TO PULL FROM
GROUNDWATER SO THAT'S WHY I
SAID WE'D PROBABLY BE LOOKING
NORTHEAST SOMEWHERE ELSE WHICH
WOULD MEAN GOING OUT AND BUYING
SOME LAND TO BE ABLE TO SINK
WELL AND DRAW WATER POTENTIALLY
IT MEAN SOME KIND OF REGIONAL
COLLABORATION NEGOTIATION YOU
WE HAVE NOT WE DID THIS
EVALUATION BACK IN TWENTY
FOURTEEN.
WE DID LOOK AT WHERE WE COULD
POTENTIALLY LOOK AND SO I'M
BASING IT ON THAT ALL OF THESE
STUDIES WOULD REALLY NEED TO BE
UPDATED THOUGH BECAUSE THE DATA
IS OLD AND THEN YOU'RE HAVING
TO WORK WITH YOU GOT TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT'S THE ALLOWABLE AMOUNT
OF WATER YOU COULD TAKE GIVEN
WHERE YOU WANT TO SINK A WELL
THAT'S AVAILABLE AND WHAT THE
IMPACT IS TO NEIGHBORING WELLS.
THERE ARE LIMITS ON LARGE
CAPACITY WITHDRAWALS AND SO WE
WOULD HAVE TO CONSIDER ALL
OF THAT.
>> YEAH, OK.
AND THEN I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
YOU OR SOMEBODY ELSE PAY FOR
THE WATER.
WATERSTREET IT IS THE CITY
LOOKING IS IT POSSIBLE TO
REDUCE THE IMPACT OF THAT BY
REALLY UPGRADING OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE UTILITIES IN THE
CITY AND TRYING TO AVOID ALL
THAT WATER HITTING THE WASTE
WATER TREATMENT PLANT OR IS IT
TOUGH WITH THAT?
>> WE HAVE BEEN DOING A LOT
OF THAT OVER THE LAST DECADE
AND A HALF AND REALLY THE
MODELING THAT'S BEING DONE AND
THE FLOW METERING ANALYSIS WILL
KIND OF TELL US WHERE WE'RE AT
TODAY.
BUT YEAH, WE'RE REHABBING
SEWERS TRYING SEAL UP MANHOLES,
JUST TRYING TO DO EVERYTHING WE
CAN TO TIGHTEN UP THE SYSTEM
TELL IS THAT HAVING AN IMPACT
FOR ALL THE WORK YOU'VE BEEN
DOING?
>> I'VE BEEN TOLD THAT IT'S
KIND OF KEEPING THINGS STATUS
QUO.
I WAS EXPECTING TO SEE MORE
IMPROVEMENT BUT THE WAY IT WAS
EXPLAINED TO ME IS BASED ON OUR
SYSTEM AND JUST THE AGING
OF THE SYSTEM THAT'S ACTUALLY A
GOOD THING THAT WE'VE KIND
OF HAD FLATTENED IT OFF.
WE HAVEN'T SEEN AN INCREASE BUT
NOT SO MUCH A DECREASE EITHER.
>> AND THOSE ARE SYSTEMS THAT
ARE GOING TO HAVE TO BE
REPLACED AND UPGRADED OVER TIME
ANYWAYS REGARDLESS OF WHETHER
WE HAVE NEW GROWTH OR NOT.
>> YEAH, AND WE DO REHAB MILES
OF SEWER EVERY YEAR SO IT'S NOT
LIKE WE'RE NOT TACKLING IT.
WE WE HAVE A LOT
OF REHABILITATION WORK THAT
HAPPENS EVERY YEAR.
>> OK, OK THANK YOU
COMMISSIONER MILLS.
>> I GOT SOME NERDY QUESTIONS.
ALL RIGHT GREAT INFRASTRUCTURE
NERD.
AH YEAH TOTALLY T SHIRTS IS
WHAT HE SAID IN CASE I DIDN'T
GET PICKED UP.
DOES IT MATTER WHAT KIND
OF HOUSING UNITS YOU TALKED
ABOUT THE ADDING OF THE NUMBER
OF UNITS AND SOME OF WHAT WE'RE
DISCUSSING IS KIND OF THE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF HOUSING AND
BIG BECAUSE RATES BECAUSE WATER
RATES ARE DIFFERENT BASED ON
HOUSING TYPE.
I ASSUME SO.
BUT I'M JUST CURIOUS WHAT'S
INCLUDED HERE.
YEAH, SO IT'S A GREAT POINT.
IT'S VERY HARD TO LIKE MAKE YOU
HAD TO MAKE A BUNCH ASSUMPTIONS
RIGHT?
WE DON'T WE DON'T KNOW EVERY
SINGLE HOUSE THAT WILL BE
DEVELOPED AND SO YOU HAVE TO
MAKE SOME ESTIMATES ABOUT HOW
WHAT THE AVERAGE DAILY USAGE
MIGHT BE AND WHAT HOW MANY
PEOPLE MIGHT LIVE IN THAT HOUSE
.
AND SO WE DID BUILD IN SOME
ASSUMPTIONS TO TO WHAT YOU'RE
SAYING HERE AND I MIGHT CALL ON
THE TEAM TO HELP SUPPORT THIS
BUT THE ASSUMPTIONS THAT ARE
BUILT INTO THE CURRENT CHARTS
THAT YOU SAW WERE TWO POINT ONE
NINE PEOPLE PER UNIT.
SO THAT IS WHAT YOU KNOW IF
YOU'RE TAKING THE TWO HUNDRED
AND MULTIPLYING AT TWO POINT
ONE NINE, THAT'S WHERE YOU'RE
GETTING THAT ELEVEN THOUSAND.
BUT LIKE THAT IF YOU MIGHT HAVE
SOME STUDIO APARTMENTS,
THERE'LL BE ONE OR OR YOU MIGHT
HAVE LARGER UNITS THAT HAVE
MANY MORE THAN THAT AND SO IT'S
THAT IS WHAT IS THERE ANYTHING
ELSE YOU'VE HAD THERE, ISN'T
IT?
I MEAN AT LEAST THIS IS NOW
DATING AND AGAIN I KNOW ENOUGH
TO BE DANGEROUS BUT I FEEL LIKE
THERE WAS HUGE CONTROVERSY A
FEW YEARS AGO ABOUT WATER RATES
AND HOW IT'S DISTRIBUTED
BETWEEN BETWEEN SINGLE FAMILY
AND MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCES AND
ALSO THE IDEA THAT LIKE WHO WAS
THERE WHO WATERS THEIR LAWN AND
WASHES CARS AND THE LIKE.
AND I'M I'M JUST CURIOUS IF
FIRST WALL IF THAT'S IF I'M
REMEMBERING RIGHT.
BECAUSE IT WAS PRETTY COVID I
KIND OF THINK AND SO GOODNESS
KNOWS AND SECOND OF ALL LIKE
HOW DOES THAT FACTOR IN BECAUSE
I THINK WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT HERE IS ALSO A SHIFT IN
THE KINDS OF UNITS AND PARTIC
YEAH.
>> YEAH YEAH I WOULD FEEL LIKE
YES.
>> SO I WOULD SAY LIKE I GO
BACK TO AGAIN MORE STUDIES BE
NEEDED BECAUSE I DO THINK THAT
WE WOULD NEED TO LOOK WE DO
KNOW THAT SINCE WE MOVED TO A
DIFFERENT RATE STRUCTURE MANY
YEARS AGO THAT WE'VE SEEN OUR
AVERAGE PER CAPITA USE GO DOWN
QUITE A BIT SO PEOPLE ARE USING
A LOT LESS WATER.
WE WE APPRECIATE THAT WE PUT
CONSERVATION MEASURES IN PLACE
.
WE ALSO NEED THOUGH TO GENERATE
ENOUGH REVENUE TO KEEP UP OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE BECAUSE WE
INFRASTRUCTURE NERDS AND WE WE
NEED TO WELL IN GROWTH I MEAN
THIS IS EFFICIENCY IMPROVING
CAN MEET ADDITIONAL GROWTH AND
SO THOSE ARE COMPLEMENTARY IN
SOME WAYS AND I'M JUST CURIOUS
ABOUT THE ASSUMPTIONS THAT WENT
INTO HERE IS THAT USING A
MULTIPLIER FOR A SINGLE FAMILY
OR IS THAT USING THE MULTIPLIER
FOR MULTIFAMILY OR IS IT KIND
OF A BLENDED BECAUSE AGAIN
THAT'S I THINK THAT THAT WE'RE
ANTICIPATING A SHIFT IN THE
KIND OF UNITS THAT WILL HAVE WE
ARE AND I WILL LET OUR
CONSULTANTS MAYBE SPEAK TO
THAT.
I WILL SAY THAT IN GENERAL
THOUGH IN PLANNING FOR THIS
SORT OF THING YOU CAN IMAGINE
THAT WE ARE CONSERVATIVE
BECAUSE WE HAVE A PLAN FOR THE
WHAT IFS SO THAT WE ALWAYS HAVE
ENOUGH CAPACITY.
YEAH.
SO IT'S A DELICATE BALANCE.
>> YEAH.
HI CHRIS.
I'M SAHM ADVISORS.
I WILL SAY AT LEAST ON THE
WATER SIDE AND I BELIEVE ON THE
SEMATARY SIDE IT'S REALLY
REFLECTIVE OF AVERAGE IN THE
CITY RIGHT NOW.
SO WE'VE GONE THROUGH LOOKED AT
THE USE PER PERSON THE KIND
OF PEAKING FACTOR WE SEE ON
THAT USE AND THAT IS WHAT WE
PROJECTED I THINK IN THE WATER
PLAN PLAN THEY USE A BIT
DIFFERENT NUMBERS ORIGINALLY SO
THAT THEY'RE NOT TOTALLY IN
LINE AND WE KIND OF NEED TO GET
TO A CONSENSUS IN THIS PROCESS
ON WHAT WE GO FORWARD WITH.
>> AND AGAIN, I MEAN YOU GUYS
KNOW THIS I DON'T KNOW HOW
DIFFERENT THE MULTIPLIERS ARE
FOR SINGLE FAMILY VERSUS
MULTIFAMILY.
I CANNOT IMAGINE THAT YOU GOT
INFORMATION ON DUPLEXES OR
TRIPLEX ISN'T LIKE AND HOW
THEY'RE USED PER PERSON IS
DIFFERENT.
>> BUT BUT I THINK THAT THAT'S
ONE OF THE KEY LIKE AS WE'RE
TALKING I MEAN IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT OUR LAND USE AND
OUR INFRASTRUCTURE ARE KEEPING
UP WITH OUR TALKING TO EACH
OTHER AND I'M JUST WANTING TO
MAKE SURE THAT WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT UNITS THAT WORK
USING USING SIMILAR
MULTIPLIERS.
>> SO THAT'S THAT'S JUST WHY I
WOULD I MEAN WE ALREADY KNOW
LIKE ANN ARBOR IN GENERAL WATER
USE PATTERNS ARE DIFFERENT THAN
WHAT YOU WOULD SEE IN ANOTHER
COMMUNITY BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT
MORE TRANSIENT POPULATION, A
LOT PEOPLE LEAVE IN THE SUMMER.
WE DON'T HAVE AS MUCH
IRRIGATION AND LIKE THAT PLAYS
INTO IT AND WE ARE LOOKING AT
THAT COOL.
>> YEAH, THAT ACTUALLY IS A
LOVELY TRANSITION TO MY NEXT
QUESTION WHICH I THINK AGAIN IS
MAYBE OUTSIDE OF YOUR EXPERTIZE
BUT YOU GUYS ARE THE UTILITY
PEOPLE SO I'M JUST GOING TO ASK
IT PART OF THIS IS THAT THERE'S
GROSS HAPPENING IN THE REGION.
RIGHT.
AND SO ALSO WHEN WE'RE THINKING
ABOUT WATER WITHDRAWAL LIKE YOU
MENTIONED, LIKE WE GOT TO THINK
ABOUT OTHER PEOPLE'S WELLS
RIGHT.
AND MY BUT THERE ARE HOLES
HOUSING UNITS BEING BUILT THERE
THAT ARE ALSO INCREASING AND SO
MOST OF MY TIME IS IN ENERGY SO
I'M GOING TO GIVE THE ENERGY
ANALOGY AND THEN ASK THE WATER
QUESTION LIKE IT'S IT'S MUCH
EASIER FOR US TO BE NET ZERO AS
A CITY IF WE JUST PUT A BUBBLE
BREAK BECAUSE WE CAN CONTROL
IT.
RIGHT.
BUT THAT'S NOT ACTUALLY HOW THE
WORLD WORKS.
EMISSIONS GROW AROUND US AND
ACTUALLY COULD GROW FASTER
AROUND BECAUSE UNITS FROM AN
ENERGY PERSPECTIVE THAT ARE
BUILT OUTSIDE THE CITY BANABA
TEND TO BE BIGGER AND SO
THERE'S MORE TO HEAT AND COOL
RIGHT?
>> THEY DON'T THEY'RE THEY'RE
DRIVING MORE BECAUSE THEY DON'T
HAVE WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> RIGHT.
AND SO LIKE WE SHOULDN'T REALLY
LIKE PUTTING A BUBBLE IS
COUNTERPRODUCTIVE TO THE WORLD
.
>> I'M CURIOUS FROM THE WATER
UTILITIES PERSPECTIVE IF THAT
IS ALSO THE CASE LIKE INDOOR
AND IT SEEMS LIKE AT LEAST LIKE
BEING IN ANN ARBOR MAYBE LIKE
MAYBE THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT I
DON'T KNOW IF IT'S PEER
PRESSURE OR THE COST OF WATER
THAT YOU DON'T THERE'S NOT AS
MUCH IRRIGATION IF THERE'S
NUMBERS ON IN TERMS OF USAGE
DATA PER PERSON AND OR I'M JUST
THINKING ABOUT ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACTS I IN THE TOWNSHIPS
THERE IF THEY'RE ON SEPTIC
RIGHT.
>> LIKE THAT'S DIFFERENT BALL
OF WAX THEN TREATED WATER THAT
GOES THROUGH THE PLANT.
>> RIGHT.
AND SO I'M JUST CURIOUS IF THAT
HAS IF YOU HAVE INFORMATION ON
THAT OR HOW WE MIGHT THINK
ABOUT THAT TOO BECAUSE WE YEAH.
>> YEAH YEAH.
MAYBE JUST TO CLARIFY WHAT
YOU'RE ASKING ARE YOU ASKING IF
WE HAVE DATA ON WATER USE
OUTSIDE OF THE CITY BECAUSE WE
HAVE REALLY GREAT DATA ON WATER
USE WITHIN THE CITY?
YEAH, IN PART IT'S JUST IT'S
JUST TO COMPARE
THE REALITY IS
IF WE SAY WE WILL LET THE WATER
TREATMENT PLANT SIZE DRY
FUTUREGROWTH THAT GROWTH WILL
GO OUTSIDE THE CITY.
YES.
AND MAY BE COUNTERPRODUCTIVE
FROM LIKE A WISE USE OF WATER
PERSPECTIVE.
>> RIGHT.
AND SO WE NEED SO EVEN IF THAT
MEANS BUILDING ANOTHER
EXPANDING OUR WATER SYSTEM
AGAIN FROM A REGIONAL
PERSPECTIVE THAT ACTUALLY MIGHT
BE MAYBE MORE SUSTAINABLE EVEN
IF IT'S A PAIN IN THE FOR US
BECAUSE WE HAVE TO ADD IT YOU
KNOW, WE HAVE TO ADD ANOTHER
PLANT.
SO WHAT I'M TRYING UNDERSTAND
IS LIKE IS THAT A CORRECT
ASSUMPTION THAT THERE ARE SOME
ECONOMIES OF SCALE ASSOCIATED
WITH THIS?
I MEAN AND YOU MIGHT NOT IT'S
NOT PART OF YOUR PRESENTATION.
YOU MIGHT NOT KNOW THE ANSWER
BUT I'M TRYING TO THINK BEYOND
JUST THE CITY BECAUSE YEAH, IT
WOULD SAY AT A HIGH LEVEL.
YES.
AND DEPENDING ON SCENARIO WE
LOOKED AT WHAT WE WOULD NEED TO
DO FOR WELLS COULD BE
CONTAMINATED STILL OR HAVE
DIOXANE HITS.
SO LIKE WE KNOW THAT WE MAY
HAVE TO EXPAND FOR THOSE FOLKS,
RIGHT?
YEAH.
SO MORE OF THAT COULD BE
NECESSARY BUT YOU'RE CERTAINLY
RIGHT THAT WE WE DID AND I
TALKED ABOUT A LITTLE BIT LIKE
THAT WE WE HAVEN'T LOOKED AT
GROWTH IN THE TOWNSHIPS THAT WE
CURRENTLY HAVE CONTRACTS WITH
AS PART OF THIS ANALYSIS.
BUT IT IS YOU KNOW, IT'S GOING
TO BE NEEDED.
>> YEAH.
AND EVEN THE GROWTH THAT IS
BEYOND YOUR SYSTEM BUT THE
WELLS RIGHT.
AGAIN THAT'S IMPACTING OUR
WATER BUDGET OVERALL.
>> RIGHT.
REGIONAL RIGHT.
OK, SO AND AS CHRIS SAID, YOU
KNOW, DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES
LOOK DIFFERENT AND SO WHEN WE
TALK ABOUT ALL THESE NUMBERS
AND WE'RE LIKE WHY ARE IT'S ALL
OVER THE PLACE?
THERE ARE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
STANDARDS WE USE IN THE SECTOR
AND IT SORT OF DEPENDS YOU PICK
WHAT FITS BEST FOR YOUR
COMMUNITY.
SO IN ANN ARBOR A LOT OF PEOPLE
DON'T IRRIGATE BECAUSE A LOT
OF THE HOMES ARE OLDER AND YOUR
YARDS ARE SMALL AND WE
ENCOURAGE POLLINATOR FRIENDLY
YARDS AND PEOPLE THAT AREN'T
MOWING AS MUCH VERSUS MAYBE A
NEWER DEVELOPMENT THAT'S OUT IN
A TOWNSHIP WHERE THEY'VE ALL
GOT UNDERGROUND SPRINKLER
SYSTEMS.
SO IT'S JUST LOOKS DIFFERENT
HERE FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS.
AND SO WE PICK DIFFERENT
FACTORS WHEN WE CALCULATE
CAPACITY ANALYSIS.
YEAH, YEAH.
OK, THE FINAL ONE IS ABOUT THE
TRUNK LINES AND THIS IS NOW NOT
WATER BUT IT'S MORE ON THE
WASTE WATER DISTRIBUTION AND
MAYBE IT WAS JUST THE THE MAP
THAT YOU SHOWED WITH THE RED
LINES WHICH TOOK IS LIKE DANGER
DANGER BACKUP'S INTO PATED NOW
THE NEXT ONE WITH ARROWS KEEP
THAT ONE.
YEP.
YEAH THERE ARE SOME GROUPS
THERE IT FEELS TO ME LIKE THAT
HAPPENS TO BE WHERE DO WE KNOW
THE QUESTION IS MAYBE THIS
STUDY IS YOU'RE NOT DONE YET SO
RIGHT.
BUT I'M CURIOUS ABOUT
DEVELOPMENT ALONG TRUNK LINES
VERSUS FARTHER TOWARDS THE END
OF THE LITTLE BRANCHES RIGHT
LIKE INTO THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> HOW WHETHER ADDING THAT
ADDITIONAL WATER INTO THE
SYSTEM LIKE HOW DO WE KNOW
WHERE WHERE IS THE BETTER PLACE
TO ADD THAT INTO A SYSTEM?
HOW DO WE ACCOUNT FOR THAT?
>> I'M NOT SURE IF THIS WAS
YOUR QUESTION BUT FOR ANY NEW
DEVELOPMENT COMING INTO THE
CITY RIGHT NOW WE DO USE THE
HYDRAULIC MODEL THAT WE HAVE
THAT LOOK TO SEE WHAT THE
IMPACTS ARE NEW DEVELOPMENT TO
MAKE SURE THEY'RE NOT
EXACERBATING, YOU KNOW, ANY
EXISTING AREAS AND YOU KNOW,
LEADING TO THE RISK OF BASE
FROM BACKUPS OR ASO'S.
BUT THERE'S NOT LIKE A BIG
UNIVERSAL THING SAYING LIKE
ADDING IT IN DOWNTOWN HAS A
DIFFERENCE AND ADDING IT KIND
OF ON THE PERIPHERY OF TOWN OR
ONE PART OF TOWN VERSUS ANOTHER
PART.
IT'LL HELP US BETTER UNDERSTAND
THAT WE'RE OK THEN I WOULD SAY
NOW BUT I BUT THAT WAS IS THE
GOAL.
YES.
SUPER OK, THANKS.
>> ALL RIGHT COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBEE AND THEN
COMMISSIONER NORTON AND THEN I
HAVE A BIT AND WE HAVE TO WRAP
UP TO GO TO OUR NEXT PERSON.
IS THAT OK WITH EVERYONE?
>> ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBEE.
SO THIS IS JUST A COMMENT AND
IT'S NOT I DON'T NEED TO ANSWER
BECAUSE I DON'T WANT TO PUT
ANYBODY ON THE SPOT BUT I JUST
THINK IT'S INTERESTING THAT WE
GET WE'RE GETTING A LOT
OF COMMENTS FROM PEOPLE SAYING
THAT IF WE DO THINGS LIKE
DECREASE SETBACKS THAT THAT
MEANS WE ARE HARM THE
ENVIRONMENT BECAUSE THERE'S
FEWER TREES OR MORE OR LESS
GRASS AND AND SO IT JUST STRUCK
ME AS INTERESTING AND HOW
COMPLICATED THIS ALL IS IS THAT
THINGS LIKE HAVING SMALLER
YARDS WITH LESS GRASS MEANS WE
USE LESS WATER WHICH IS
ACTUALLY AND SO IT'S IT'S NOT
YOU KNOW, THERE ISN'T A CLEAR
GOOD OR BAD OR THERE MAY BE
CLEAR GOODS AND BADS BUT IT'S
NOT IT'S MUCH MORE COMPLICATED
THAN IF WE CUT DOWN A TREE
THAT'S BAD AND IF WE HAVE BIG
YARDS THAT'S GOOD.
THAT'S CORRECT.
IT'S ALL VERY COMPLICATED.
I MEAN THE WATER SYSTEM IS ALL
INTERRELATED.
YEAH.
AND SO THAT WAS JUST
INTERESTING AND YEAH.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
>> WHETHER IT BE COMMISSIONER
NORTON COMING I'M GOING TO JUST
KIND OF KEEP TRYING AGAIN WE'RE
STRUGGLING MIGHTILY BECAUSE ANN
ARBOR IS NOT A BUBBLE UNTO
ITSELF.
WE HAVE WE'RE IN THE CONTEXT
OF A LARGER REGION A LOT
OF PEOPLE LIVE OUTSIDE OF AND
ARE COMING IN AND FRANKLY WHAT
WE'RE TRYING TO CONTEMPLATE IS
DO WE MAKE MORE ROOM FOR MORE
FOLKS TO LIVE IN THE CITY
INSTEAD OF HAVING TO COMMUTE IN
AND ALL OF THAT CONSIDERATION
AND AS A GENERAL RULE IN THE
PLANNING WORLD IT'S PRETTY WELL
ACCEPTED.
MORE DENSE COMMUNITIES ARE MORE
ENERGY EFFICIENT BECAUSE
THEY'RE BUILDING KINDS
OF STRUCTURES THAT YOU CAN DO
IN LESS COMMUTING LONG
COMMUTING THAT'S REQUIRED.
THEY'RE MORE ECOLOGICALLY SOUND
BECAUSE IF YOU CAN COMBINE THAT
WITH PROTECTING ECOLOGICALLY
VALUABLE SPACES IN THE REGION,
THEY'RE MORE PROTECTIVE OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE BASE.
IF YOU CAN MAKE SURE YOU'RE
INCLUDING GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
IN THE CITY FOR FEATURES THEY
REQUIRE.
AND SO THE PARALLEL QUESTION I
THINK COMMISSIONER MILLS WAS
TRYING TO GET IS IT ALSO THE
CASE IN TERMS OF WATER
CONSUMPTION THAT CITY DENSITIES
ARE MORE WATER EFFICIENT IN
GENERAL THAN MORE SUBURBAN
KINDS DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS
OUTSIDE OF THE CITY AND MAYBE
AH IF THERE ARE LARGE IRRIGATED
LAWNS BUT WHO KNOWS?
IT'S KIND OF WHAT I'M HEARING
BUT MAYBE YOU COULD I GUESS THE
QUESTION IS AS YOU DO THESE
STUDIES DON'T TO THE EXTENT YOU
CAN DON'T JUST ISOLATE ANN
ARBOR IN A BUBBLE BUT THINK
ABOUT WHERE BE SITTING IN A
REGIONAL CONTEXT IN TERMS
OF WATER DEMAND AND RECOGNIZE
THAT PEOPLE ARE GOING TO NEED
TO BE ACCOMMODATED FOR THIS
WATER USE WHETHER THEY'RE IN
THE CITY OR NOT AND MAYBE IT IS
TIME TO BE THINKING ABOUT
REGIONAL WATER SOURCING WITH
OUR NEIGHBORING JURISDICTIONS
INSTEAD OF STIRRING THE WATER
AND PROVIDING WATER BACK OUT TO
THEM, ALL OF THAT.
SO THAT'S THE ONE REQUEST TO
KIND OF MAKE SURE YOU'RE
THINKING ABOUT THAT REGIONAL
CONTEXT IN YOUR PLANNING.
>> AND THEN THE QUESTION I HAVE
FOR YOU AND I AM GOING TO MAYBE
PUT YOU ON THE SPOT A LITTLE
BIT BECAUSE WE ARE GETTING LOTS
OF COMMENTS THAT WE DON'T HAVE
THE WATER CAPACITY FOR ALL
OF THIS HUGE GROWTH THAT WE'RE
CALLING FOR IN THE PLAN.
AND I WANT TO MAKE A CLEAR
STATEMENT WE'RE NOT PLANNING
FOR GROWTH IN THE SENSE THAT
WE'RE PICKING A TARGET THAT WE
WANT TO AIM FOR AND WE'RE GOING
TO MAKE SURE THOSE HOMES GET
DEVELOPED.
WE'RE TRYING OUR BEST TO
ESTIMATE WHAT'S THE DEMAND FOR
FOLKS WHO WANT TO LIVE HERE AND
WHAT COULD THE GROWTH BE GIVEN
THE CHANGES THAT WE MIGHT MAKE
TO ZONING AND WHY DO WE
ACCOMMODATE SO WE DON'T LIVE IN
A PLANNED ECONOMY WHERE THIS
PLANNING COMMISSION IS GOING TO
DICTATE HOW MANY UNITS ARE
GOING TO GET BUILT AND WHERE
THEY'RE GOING TO GET BUILT.
RIGHT.
I WANT TO GET THAT ON THE
TABLE.
HAVING SAID THAT, THE QUESTION
I HAVE FOR YOU IS DOES YOUR
STOMACH CHURN WHEN YOU THINK
ABOUT THE HIGH END ESTIMATES
FOR WHAT POPULATION INCREASES
COULD BE LIKE IS THE WATER
SYSTEM OR THE WASTEWATER SYSTEM
GOING TO CRASH OR YEAH, WE CAN
ACCOMMODATE THAT.
WE JUST NEED TO PLAN FOR IT AND
MAKE SURE WE'RE BREAKING IN TO
OUR PLANNING EFFORTS.
THAT'S KIND OF WHAT I WANT TO
GET OUT LIKE SHOULD WE REALLY
BE WORRIED BECAUSE OF THE
COMMENTS WE'RE GETTING THAT WE
CAN'T HANDLE THIS?
IT'S GOING TO DESTROY THE CITY?
>> I'M USING A BIT OF HYPERBOLE
HERE.
YEAH, WHAT I CAN SAY IS THAT
THERE IS WE BELIEVE THERE IS
ROOM THERE IS CAPACITY FOR
GROWTH.
IT'S THE AMOUNT AND INTENSITY
OF GROWTH THAT I THINK IS WHERE
WE GET NERVOUS AS UTILITY
PEOPLE BECAUSE LIKE YOU WANT TO
YOU'D NEVER WANT BASEMENTS TO
BACK UP AND YOU NEVER YOU HAVE
A DAY WHERE YOU CAN'T PROVIDE
WATER TO THE CUSTOMERS YOU HAVE
AND SO YOU DO HAVE TO BE
CONSERVATIVE AND SO I THINKING
ABOUT THE INTENSITY IS
PARTICULARLY THE VERY, VERY
HIGH END IS SOMETHING THAT
WE'RE WORRIED ABOUT.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN WE CAN'T
FIGURE IT OUT BUT IT IS
SOMETHING WE ARE WORRIED ABOUT
AND WOULD COST A LOT.
AND SO THAT'S WHAT I THINK IS
SORT OF YET TO BE KNOWN IS LIKE
HOW MUCH WOULD IT TAKE TO TO
GET THAT ADDITIONAL
INFRASTRUCTURE CAPACITY FOR THE
HIGHEST AMOUNT OF DENSITY SO WE
DIVISION BACK TO THE TRUCK.
>> YOU DON'T WANT TO UNDER PLAN
REALIZED THAT WE DIDN'T DO
CAPACITY INCREASES, THAT WE
SHOULD HAVE THE SAME TIME WE
DON'T WANT TO OVERPLAY AND
BUILD A HONKIN BIG NEW PLANT
AND THEN IT DOESN'T COME FIRST.
SO THAT'S THE TRICK.
YEAH, RIGHT.
OK, THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
GORDON.
I JUST HAVE A COUPLE QUESTIONS
.
>> I DON'T THINK I HAVE A
COMMENT.
THEY MIGHT COME OUT FOR SOME
COMMENT AND THEN THEY'LL
TRANSITION TO A QUESTION.
>> SO FIRST OF ALL THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR COMING IN.
YAY INFRASTRUCTURE NERD'S.
>> I WAS JUST JOKING THAT YOU
ALSO HAVE TEE SHIRTS WHEN YOU
COME TO PRESENT TO US.
SO TALK TO ME ABOUT WET WEATHER
.
DOES THAT IN AH THE CONNECTED
FLOODING RAINS A PART OF THAT.
>> YEP.
AND IF THEY WERE DISCONNECTED
WOULD THAT IMPROVE THAT?
WE'RE GOING TO EVALUATE THAT AS
PART OF THE STUDY OK YES.
I MEAN THEY ARE CONNECTED OK
AND THEN IS IT THE CASE THAT
OUR PEAK USAGE IS OFF BY ABOUT
15 PERCENT OVER
THE LAST
SEVERAL YEARS?
>> ARE YOU FOR WATER USAGE JUST
WATER USAGE ACROSS THE CITY
LIKE WHEN WE HIT A PEAK BUT
WE'RE NOT WE'RE NOT ABOVE THAT
PEAK.
WE'RE BELOW THAT PEAK ABOUT 15
PERCENT.
IF YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
DRINKING WATER, OUR AVERAGE
DEMAND HAS DROPPED AS I
MENTIONED SINCE THE INCLINING
BLOCK RATE STRUCTURE WAS PUT
INTO PLACE LIKE MANY YEARS MORE
THAN A DECADE AGO.
WE HAVE SEEN A DROP AND PART
THAT IS ALSO BECAUSE ALL
OF THOSE OLD REALLY ENERGY
INTENSIVE APPLIANCES, THEY'VE
REALLY CYCLED THEMSELVES OUT.
VERY FEW PEOPLE HAVE THOSE.
I MEAN THAT'S CERTAINLY STILL
EXISTS DON'T GET ME WRONG.
BUT SLOWLY THEY'VE BEEN GOING
AWAY AND SO WE'VE SEEN THAT
DROP BECAUSE OF THOSE THINGS.
>> OK, AND THEN CAN WE TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT COSTS SO WE
KNOW THAT THE USERS OF THE
SYSTEM PAY FOR THE SYSTEM.
BUT I SUSPECT THAT YOU'RE ALSO
A PART OF THE SIPI.
SO THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
THAT THE CITY HAS THERE ARE
BUDGET ALLOCATIONS THAT
REQUESTS YEAR OVER YEAR AND
THEN DEVELOPMENT PAYS INTO.
ARE THERE OTHER FUNDING SOURCES
THAT YOU HAVE THAT HELP PAY FOR
THE INFRASTRUCTURE INSIDE THE
CITY
?
YES.
SO THERE ARE UTILITY FUNDS THAT
WE DO PLAN UTILITY PROJECTS,
THE IMPROVEMENTS, THE
RESTORATION, REHABILITATION AND
UPSIZING OF EXISTING PIPES THAT
WE USE UTILITY RATE DOLLARS TO
PAY FOR.
THERE ARE WE DO CAPTURE WHEN
NEW USERS CONNECT TO THE
SYSTEM.
WE CAPTURE WHAT IS CALLED A
CAPITAL COST RECOVERY CHARGE
AND THAT IS SORT OF THERE THAT
NEW BUILDING OR NEW USER IS
CONNECTING AND BUYING SORT
OF THEY'RE PAYING INTO THEIR
PART OF THE TREATMENT PLANTS
AND THEY'RE PART OF THE PUMP
STATIONS.
AND SO THAT IS IT'S SORT OF NOT
PART OF THE RATES.
IT'S PART OF SORT OF IN
STRUCTURE.
I WILL SAY THAT THAT WHEN THAT
WAS CREATED AND I CAN PROBABLY
SPEAK TO THE MORE OF THIS IN
DETAIL IT WAS CREATED IT WAS
SEVERAL THAT HASN'T BEEN
UPDATED SINCE TWENTY SEVENTEEN
AND SO IT WAS BASED ON SORT
OF THE EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE
AT THE TIME AND LIKE WHAT
PEOPLE WOULD NEED TO BUY INTO.
SO THAT WOULD BE SOMETHING THAT
WE WOULD BE LOOKING AT.
DOES THAT NEED TO CHANGE NOW
THAT WE ARE CONTEMPLATING A LOT
MORE INFRASTRUCTURE AND THAT WE
NEED ALL THOSE USERS TO BE
BUYING INTO THAT INFRASTRUCTURE
TO AND SO THAT IS I THINK ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT HOPEFULLY
SPEAKS TO YOUR POINT.
>> I THINK THERE ARE ALSO OUR
FEDERAL GRANTS.
DO YOU WANT TO SPEAK WITH THE
AS WE THINK ABOUT LIKE LARGE
SCALE PROJECTS LIKE THE PLANT
REPLACEMENT PROJECT WE WOULD BE
LOOKING FOR LOW INTEREST LOANS
THROUGH THE STATE AND ALSO THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
SOMETHING CALLED THE WIPHA AND
THOSE ARE FOR LARGER PROJECTS
NORTH OF TWENTY MILLION
DOLLARS.
SO WE WOULD BE LOOKING AT
TRYING TO LEVERAGE SOME
OF THOSE FUNDS BUT THEY ARE
LOANS THAT BUT OFTEN VERY LOW
INTEREST SO THEY CANNOT BE USED
FOR GROWTH SO ALL RIGHT.
>> THERE WERE SOME ACRONYMS
THAT YOU I'M SORRY I WAS RIGHT
IN THE MIDDLE.
>> IF YOU CAN HOLD ON FOR A
SECOND, THERE ARE A COUPLE
ACRONYMS THAT YOU USED SO THERE
WAS SOMETHING REAL FLOW
METERING.
THERE WAS ANOTHER F LIKE F D OR
SOMETHING.
SO LIKE I JUST WANT TO CAPTURE
THIS BECAUSE IT'S INSIDE
BASEBALL AND IT'S FINE FOR THE
NERDS BUT EVERYONE ELSE HAS NO
IDEA WHAT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
AND THEN WE'LL GO TO
COMMISSIONER NORTON'S
CLARIFICATION.
>> I DO APOLOGIZE.
NO, NO, NO.
I USE THEM ALL THE TIME SO
STANDS FOR SANITARY SEWER
OVERFLOW OK, SO IT'S NOT LIKE
SOME OTHER EUPHEMISM.
ALRIGHT AND THEN THE FLOW
METERING YOU TALKED ABOUT SO
THOSE ARE SENSORS THAT YOU HAVE
WITHIN THE PIPES THAT ARE
TELLING YOU WHAT'S GOING ON SO
THAT YOU CAN MAKE ASSUMPTIONS
OR PLANS TO ADDRESS IT.
>> THAT IS CORRECT.
OK AND I THINK THERE WAS
ANOTHER ONE THAT HAD IN IT BUT
I GUESS I'VE LOST IT AND YOU
DON'T KNOW WHAT I'M TALKING
ABOUT.
>> ART COMMISSIONER NORTEN AND
THEN WE'LL GO TO A PLAN OR
MANAGER REMONSTRANCE
YOUR MIKE
WASN'T ON.
>> WE CAN JUST ASK FOR
CLARIFICATION WHAT YOU MEANT BY
THAT.
YEAH.
SO IT CAN BE USED FOR TO
REPLACE AGING INFRASTRUCTURE
FOR SYSTEM NEEDED UPGRADES BUT
IF WE SAID THAT WE JUST YOU
KNOW WE WANT TO BUILD THIS
GIANT PLANT FOR WHAT WE THINK
IS COMING IN THE FUTURE, THEY
WOULD YOU KNOW, WE WOULD NOT
SCORE ON THE THE LOAN
APPLICATION FAVORABLY.
>> SO THEN HOW DO YOU GET LOANS
IF YOU ARE HAVING TO EXPAND
YOUR PLANT BECAUSE YOU'RE
EXPECTING GROWTH?
>> SO I THINK THE HOPE IS THAT
AS DEVELOPERS COME IN THEY'RE
PAYING INTO THE SYSTEM THROUGH
THE PAYMENTS INTO THE SYSTEM.
THE DEVELOPMENT IS PAYING FOR
IT AS IT COMES IN, RIGHT?
YEAH, BECAUSE WE CAN'T HAVE AS
I MENTIONED EARLIER, WE CAN'T
HAVE RATEPAYERS PAYING FOR
FUTURE GROWTH.
>> YEAH, BUT IT'S LUMPY, RIGHT?
I MEAN IT'S NOT LIKE WE CAN
INCREMENTALLY ENTER THE SYSTEM
WITH EVERY NEW DEVELOPMENT.
YEAH, NO IT'S CERTAINLY LIKE AS
WE SAID EARLIER, THIS IS ALL
QUITE COMPLICATED.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU MR LEARNER.
I WOULD LIKE THAT I WOULD LIKE
TO ADD TO THAT AS PART OF THE
UTILITY STUDY THAT WE ARE DOING
WE ARE LOOKING AT YOU KNOW WHAT
IS SOME OF THE FUNDING
STRATEGIES OUT THERE TO TRY TO
ACCOMPLISH SOME OF THESE
CAPITAL INVESTMENTS.
SO THANK YOU ALL SO MUCH.
JUST ONE QUESTION THAT CAME UP
A COUPLE TIMES AND I JUST WANT
TO POSE THE QUESTION MAYBE
BEFORE WE WRAP UP WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT I THINK THERE'S SOME
QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW OUR WATER
USAGE SORT OF REGIONALLY
CONTEXTUALIZED AND DO YOU HAVE
ANY DIFFERING WATER USE DATA
FROM CITY CUSTOMERS VERSUS SOME
OF THE CUSTOMERS THAT WE
CONTRACT WITH SOME OF THE
TOWNSHIPS.
SO WE HAD THESE CONTRACTS WITH
THE ANN ARBOR TOWNSHIP ENTIRE
TOWNSHIP.
BUT I'M JUST CURIOUS IF WE HAVE
ANY DIFFERENTIAL OF DATA THAT
SHOWS TO WHAT MR MILLS AND MR
NORTON WERE GETTING AT THAT
BECAUSE OF LIKE HISTORIC
PATTERNS OF DEVELOPMENT VERSUS
MORE MODERN.
DO WE HAVE ANY DIFFERENTIAL
DATA IN THAT REGARD OR DO WE
NOT HAVE THAT LEVEL OF DETAIL?
WE JUST CONTRACT THEM WITH
THOSE TOWNSHIPS THEN THERE THEY
HAVE THAT DATA.
SO WE HAVE INFORMATION THAT
COMES IN THAT SHOWS THEIR TOTAL
USE THERE MAX.
OUR THERE MAX WE ALSO HAVE
RELATIONSHIPS WITH THEM AND
THEY SHARE WITH US LIKE THEY'RE
THEY'RE PUMPING.
SO WHAT THEY'RE SEEING USUALLY
THAT MATCHES UP BUT WE DON'T
HAVE DATA DOWN TO THE HOUSE
LEVEL AND I FOUND MY OTHER
ACRONYM WAS F DD AND I THINK
IT'S THE FOOTING JIRINA FOOTING
DRAIN DISCONNECTION.
ALL RIGHT.
THERE WE GO.
THAT WAS IT.
SO FOR EVERYONE FOLLOWING ALONG
AT HOME SO ONE OF THE YEAH
RIGHT.
SORRY SO THAT ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I THINK I HEARD THAT WAS
VERY CLEAR IS YOU ARE GOING TO
BUILD FOR THE THE GROWTH OF THE
CITY AS YOU HAVE AS BEST AN
UNDERSTANDING OF THE ESTIMATES
THAT YOU HAVE.
RIGHT.
SO YOU CAN'T BUILD FOR CAPACITY
THAT ISN'T HERE.
SO AS THE AS THE AS THE DENSITY
OR THE POPULATION GROWTH OCCURS
THAT NECESSITATES THE GROWTH
AND THEN THE USERS HELP
CONTRIBUTE TO THE THE SORT
OF THE FUNDING SOURCE TO BUILD
OUT.
>> SO YOU HAVE A CONSERVATIVE
POSTURE NOW BECAUSE OF THE
CONSIDERATIONS THAT YOU
ARTICULATE IT LIKE WE CANNOT
SAY NO TO THE DELIVERY OF WATER
AND YOU DON'T WANT TO OVERBUILD
CAPACITY BECAUSE THEN YOU HAVE
ALL THIS CAPACITY AND IT'S NOT
BEING UTILIZED.
SO CAN YOU JUST FOR THOSE WHO
ARE TYING THE GROWTH OF THE
CITY TO THE INFRASTRUCTURE, CAN
YOU JUST GIVE US ANOTHER
SENTENCE AROUND LIKE WHAT'S
YOUR BEST PRACTICE AS YOU THINK
ABOUT THESE THINGS JUST TO HELP
US ANSWER THOSE KINDS
OF QUESTIONS BECAUSE SOME
PEOPLE WILL ALIGHT TO YOUR
RESPONSE TO COMMISSIONER
NORTON'S COMMENT OF THE HIGH
AND GROWTH MAKES US NERVOUS.
BUT EVERY TIME YOU ANSWERED THE
QUESTION YOU SAID BUT THERE IS
CAPACITY SO IT CAN FEEL
DISJOINTED TO HEAR BOTH THOSE
SENTENCES IF YOU ARE A LAY
PERSON.
SO HOW CAN YOU BE CONCERNED IF
IF THE SYSTEM HAS CAPACITY?
>> DOES THAT MAKE SENSE?
I MEAN I CAN TRY TO FORM IT A
LITTLE BIT BETTER.
IT'S NOT MY CONCERN.
I'M JUST TRYING TO PRESENT IT
BECAUSE WE HAVE YOU HERE AND I
THINK IT'S HELPFUL FOR PEOPLE
TO HEAR YOU SPEAK AS OPPOSED TO
SPEAK FOR YOU.
YEAH, GROWTH HAS HAPPENED IN
THE WHOLE HISTORY
OF ANN-MARGARET.
RIGHT.
AND SO WE'VE ALWAYS BEEN
BUILDING AS WE GO.
AND SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE DO IS WHEN WE'RE PLANNING
FOR THE CAPITAL PLAN WHEN TROY
AND OTHER ENGINEERS ARE LOOKING
AT THIS DATA, WE ARE LOOKING AT
,YOU KNOW, THIS PIPE THIS SIX
INCH PIPE IS GETTING REALLY
OLD.
WE NEED TO REPLACE THAT PIPE
BECAUSE IT'S IT'S HAD TO BREAK
HISTORY OR WHATEVER WE ARE
LOOKING AT.
WHAT ARE THE OTHER DEMANDS IN
THIS AREA?
DO WE THINK THIS IS GOING TO
THIS AREA IS GOING TO BE
REDEVELOPED AND WOULD IT NEED
ADDITIONAL IF WE'RE GOING TO BE
IN THERE PUTTING IT REPLACING
THAT PIPE, WOULD WE WANT TO
HAVE ADDITIONAL SO WE ARE
LOOKING AT INCREMENTAL WAYS TO
TO CREATE WHEN AS WE'RE MAKING
IMPROVEMENTS ALSO CREATE
CAPACITY.
AND SO THAT IS ONE WAY I THINK
YOU ASK THE QUESTION ARE WE ARE
WE MAKING ROOM FOR GROWTH THAT
IS JUST SORT OF PART OF HOW THE
SYSTEM NATURALLY DEVELOPS.
>> YEAH, WHEN I WHEN I WHEN I
HEARD YOUR PRESENTATION AT THE
WORKING SESSION FOR A CITY
COUNCIL YOU SAID THERE'S
CAPACITY I I WATCHED THAT WHOLE
THING AND IT WAS LIKE AND WE'RE
PLANNING FOR GROWTH OF THE CITY
SO YOU HAD A FORWARD LOOKING
TRAJECTORY AND YOU WERE NOTING
CAPACITY IN THE SYSTEM.
>> I THINK WHAT PEOPLE THEN
HEAR YOU ALSO SAY IS OH WELL
WE'RE CONCERNED ABOUT IT BUT I
THINK WHAT I HEARD YOU SAY IS
YOU'RE CONCERNED ABOUT THE
INTENSITY LIKE I MEAN THE
TIMING AND THE INTENSITY.
SO IF WE HAVE A BANNER YEAR AND
THERE'S TEN THOUSAND UNITS THAT
GET DEVELOPED IN ONE YEAR YEAH
I SEE YOUR FACES ALL GREAT.
SO SO SO YOU KNOW THAT PROBABLY
WON'T HAPPEN BECAUSE ON AVERAGE
IT TAKES WHAT THREE HUNDRED AND
SIXTY FIVE DAYS FOR DEVELOPMENT
TO GO FROM CONCEPTION TO
SHOVELS IN THE GROUND.
>> IS THAT WHICH YOU ANSWERED
FIFTY OR SOMETHING LIKE TWO
FIFTY.
>> ALL RIGHT SO YOU HAVE YOU
HAVE ALWAYS TWO HUNDRED AND
FIFTY DAYS WITH EVERY
DEVELOPMENT TO GET THE CAPACITY
THERE.
>> GREAT.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS ANYTHING
ELSE WE SHOULD KNOW THAT YOU
FORGOT TO TELL US.
THANKS.
THANKS AGAIN FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO COME TO.
YEAH GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
ALL RIGHT I THINK IT'S MR GIANT
.
>> ARE YOU ALL GOOD OR DO WE
NEED TO TALK ABOUT OK ALL RIGHT
.
OH IF IT DIDN'T WORK YOU KNOW
WHAT I WAS GOING TO DO.
>> YEAH SOMETHING DIDN'T WORK
ON YOUR FIRST DAY AT CITY
COUNCIL, RIGHT?
THEY HAD TO CLEAR THE ROOM I
THINK OR SOMETHING.
OH THAT WAS MY FIRST DAY
EMPLOYED HERE.
YES.
YEAH IT WAS SOMETHING ELSE I
DIDN'T HAVE TO DO ANYTHING
OTHER THAN STAND UP AND YES MY
GIRL WELL WELCOME THANKS FOR
HAVING US.
YEAH.
THANK YOU ALL FOR THE
INVITATION TO BE HERE TONIGHT.
MY NAME IS GEORGE AND THE
CITY'S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR DECIDED TO SPEAK ABOUT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND FROM
WHAT I UNDERSTAND YOU'VE
ALREADY HEARD FROM JUST ABOUT
EVERYBODY IN THE COMMUNITY.
SO WITH THAT IN MIND I WILL BE
BRIEF BUT I HOPE MY COMMENTS
CAN ADD A USEFUL LAYER OF TO
THE CONVERSATION AND NOT
CONTRADICT ANY OF THE GOOD WORK
THAT'S BEEN DONE.
I'VE TRIED TO FOLLOW ALONG TALK
TO STAFF, WATCH THE NEWS AND
WATCH SOME OF THE HEARINGS BUT
OBVIOUSLY THERE'S A LOT OF GOOD
CONVERSATION THAT'S HAPPENED AS
MANY OF YOU MAY OR MAY NOT
KNOW.
MY DEPARTMENT IS NEW WHICH IN
MY TWO AND A HALF MONTHS HAS
LED TO A LOT OF PEOPLE ASKING
ME WHAT EXACTLY IS ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT?
>> AND I SAY IT DEPENDS WHO YOU
ARE, WHERE YOU ARE AND WHO YOU
ASK SOME OF MY PREVIOUS JOB
WHICH IS FOR A CITY A BIT
LARGER THAN ANN ARBOR I HELPED
LEAD THE CREATION OF OUR FIVE
YEAR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
STRATEGY AT OUR KICKOFF MEETING
FOR THAT WE HAD ALL THE HEAVY
HITTERS IN THE ROOM IN THE
MAYOR'S OFFICE CITY COUNCIL,
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS, BUSINESS
LEADERS, WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
YOU NAME IT.
WE ASK THEM TO DEFINE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IN MIND.
YOU MANY OF THESE PEOPLE WERE
ACTUALLY WORKING IN THE FIELD.
THE ANSWERS WER ALL OVER THE
PLACE.
IT'S JOBS, IT'S INFRASTRUCTURE
,WAGES, EDUCATION, ANY
BUSINESS RETENTION AND YES,
RIGHT.
SORRY BUT EVENTUALLY WE LANDED
SOMETHING BROAD BUT MEANINGFUL.
IT'S ESSENTIALLY IMPROVING
ECONOMIC TRAJECTORY OF THE
COMMUNITY AND REALIZING AT THE
HEART OF IT'S ABOUT IMPROVING
THE QUALITY OF LIFE OF PEOPLE
OLD SCHOOL ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT, YOU KNOW,
ATTRACTING AND RETAINING JOBS
AND BUSINESSES.
IT'S IMPORTANT BUT THE
OVERWHELMING TREND IS TOWARD
QUALITY OF PLACE AND QUALITY
OF LIFE AND I'D ARGUE THAT
NOWHERE DOES THAT BETTER THAN
ANN ARBOR, WHICH IS A HUGE
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE IN THIS
FIELD.
MORE PEOPLE WANT TO MOVE HERE
THAN CAN CURRENTLY AND THAT IS
NOT SOMETHING THAT IS TYPICAL
IN THE INDUSTRIAL MIDWEST AT MY
OLD JOB WE FOUGHT AND SCRAPPED
TO TRY TO INCREASE OUR
POPULATION.
IT IS IT WAS CHALLENGING EVERY
SINGLE DAY IT JUST SORT OF COME
INTO A COMMUNITY THAT'S
EXPERIENCING THIS GROWTH
PRESSURE IS IS AMAZING.
SO THE TOP LINE IN MY JOB
DESCRIPTION AND THE FIRST
MISSION OF MY OFFICE IS TO
FACILITATE THE DEVELOPMENT
OF HOUSING AT ALL INCOME LEVELS
ALSO TO BE A CITY LIKE AN
ACTUAL CITY KNOW NOT A RITZY
SUBURB OR AN AMENITY FOR
FACULTY, STAFF AND STUDENTS.
WE NEED TO PROVIDE HOUSING FOR
PEOPLE WHO ACTUALLY MAKE THE
CITY WORKS AS TEACHERS, POLICE
OFFICERS, NURSES.
NOW THAT BEING SAID, CAN'T PLAY
IN PLACES INTENSE EMPHASIS ON
HOUSING WHICH IS IMPORTANT BUT
SOMETIMES IT DOES OVERSHADOW
OTHER PRIORITIES MORE ON THAT
LATER.
BUT AS IT PERTAINS TO HOW THE
PLAN HANDLES HOUSING, WE NEED
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE FRAMING
DEMAND APPROPRIATELY AND
BALANCING IT WITH OTHER
OBJECTIVES.
AND EVEN IN THE DISCUSSION
TONIGHT I SEE THAT WE'RE HAVING
A MORE NUANCED DISCUSSION THAN
THE PLAN THE FIRST DRAFT OF THE
PLAN THAT OUR REVIEW DOES THUS
HAVE THE PLAN TO ANTICIPATE
SIGNIFICANT POPULATION GROWTH.
A LOT OF IT SEEMS TO BE BASED
ON THE CAPACITY CREATED BY
RELAXED ZONING JUST BECAUSE
ZONING WOULD ALLOW MORE PEOPLE
DOESN'T MEAN THAT PEOPLE WILL
MOVE HERE IN DROVES.
MY ONLY COMMENT ON THIS AS I'M
SURE YOU ARE AWARE OF THE
HOUSING STUDY THAT THE
COMMUNITY FOUNDATION IS ABOUT
TO RELEASE, I HOPE THAT SOME
OF THOSE PROJECTIONS CAN HELP
TO INFORM FUTURE DRAFTS OF THIS
PLAN ALSO REMEMBER THAT ZONING
IS JUST ONE PART OF THE PUZZLE
CONSTRUCTION COSTS, LABOR AND
MATERIALS ARE HIGH INTEREST
RATES ARE CURRENTLY HIGH.
LOCAL TAXES ARE HIGH AVAILABLE
SITES ARE LIMITED PREVIOUSLY
DEVELOPED SITES WHICH IS WHERE
WE'LL SEE A LOT OF OUR BIG
SIGNIFICANT PROJECTS REQUIRE
EXTENSIVE DEMOLITION AND OFTEN
REMEDIATION WHETHER IT'S, YOU
KNOW, THREE STORIES OR FOUR
STORIES OR 10 STORIES IF THE
NUMBERS DON'T PENCIL OUT IT
WON'T GET BUILT.
AND RIGHT NOW WORKFORCE AND
MARKET RATE HOUSING OFTEN
DOESN'T PENCIL OUT IN ANN ARBOR
ESPECIALLY THE WAY WE'D LIKE TO
SEE IT ALONG OUR ONE CORRIDOR
IS STRUCTURED PARKING SET BACKS
IF WE'RE SERIOUS ABOUT HOUSING
PRODUCTION IN SOME CASES PUBLIC
INCENTIVES MIGHT BE NECESSARY
NOT JUST FOR CAPITAL AFFORDABLE
BUT SIMPLY TO ADD UNITS.
SO CONSIDER ADDING POLICY
LANGUAGE STATING THE CITY
SHOULD EXPLORE THE USE
OF INCENTIVES AND OTHER TOOLS
TO ENCOURAGE THE TYPE
OF DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENT
CALLED FOR IN THE PLAN WHEN
WE'RE TALKING TO DEVELOPERS
THAT POLICY SUPPORT DOES MAKE A
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCE.
>> THIS IS ALSO A COMMUNITY
THAT REALLY SEEMS TO LOVE A
GOOD PROCESS AS WE'RE
EXPERIENCING RIGHT NOW.
BUT WE HAVE TO BE CAREFUL NOT
TO OVERBURDEN OVERREGULATE
PROJECTS THAT ARE COMING
THROUGH TO THE POINT THAT THEY
ONLY WORK WHEN THE ECONOMY IS
PERFECT.
HIGH IMPACT FEES, SUBJECTIVE OR
AMBIGUOUS REQUIREMENTS AND
CHECKING EVERY SINGLE BOX ON
EVERY SINGLE ISSUE MIGHT MAKE
SENSE WHEN INTEREST RATES ARE
NEAR ZERO BUT WHEN RATES ARE AT
SEVEN PERCENT THEY CAN KILL THE
KIND OF PROJECTS WE WANT TO SEE
WHETHER IT'S BECAUSE THE
NUMBERS STOP WORKING OR THE
EXTENDED APPROVAL PROCESS
SIMPLY CAUSES THEM TO FLAME OUT
.
SO IN TERMS OF MORE TRADITIONAL
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, WE'RE
OBVIOUSLY NOT TRYING TO ATTRACT
SMOKESTACKS OR DATA CENTERS BUT
WE STRIVE TO FIND A WAY TO GET
TO YES ON COMPANIES SEEKING LAB
SPACE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
SPACE ADVANCED AUTOMOTIVE
PROTOTYPING FACILITY ARE SOME
OF OUR OTHER COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGES.
WE'RE OFTEN TOLD WE HAVE A
HOUSING PROBLEM, NOT A JOBS
PROBLEM.
THAT MAY BE TRUE TODAY.
THIS IS A 30 YEAR PLAN
COMMUNITY SUCCEED BY BUILDING
ON THEIR STRENGTHS.
ONE OF OUR CORE STRENGTHS IS A
KNOWLEDGE BASED ECONOMY OR
KNOWLEDGE BASED INDUSTRY WITH
YOU OF THEM CRANKING OUT TOP
TALENT EVERY YEAR.
BUT EMPLOYMENT GENERATING LAND
IS FINITE.
YOU CANNOT ZONE YOU CAN BUT YOU
WOULD NEVER ZONE FROM
RESIDENTIAL BACK TO INDUSTRIAL
ONCE IT'S GONE IT'S GONE.
SO IN THIS REALM PLEASE PROCEED
WITH EXTREME CAUTION.
I'M JUST A FEW DATA POINTS TO
ILLUSTRATE THIS GUY HAS SUCH A
DETAILED PRESENTATION TWO
PERCENT ONLY TWO PERCENT
OF LAND IN OUR ZONE FOR R&D OR
INDUSTRIAL USE.
SO MY FIRST JOB QUICK STORY
SORRY IT TIES TO THIS I WAS MY
FIRST JOB AT A PLANNING SCHOOL
IS FOR THE CITY OF MINNEAPOLIS.
I WAS WORKING WITH A CHURCH WHO
HAD ACQUIRED AN OLD INDUSTRIAL
WAREHOUSE, WAS PLANNING TO
CONVERT INTO THEIR NEW
FACILITY.
IT WAS A TOUGH FIT FROM A
ZONING STANDPOINT BUT WE WERE
ABLE TO FIND A WAY TO GET TO
YES, THE CHURCH WAS ECSTATIC.
I WAS, YOU KNOW, REALLY PROUD
OF MYSELF FOR HELPING THEM.
SO I SHOW UP TO WORK THE NEXT
DAY, YOU KNOW, FEELING REALLY
SMUG AND MY PHONE RINGS.
>> IT WAS THE LONG PLANNER FOR
THAT PART OF THE CITY AND HE
SAID, JOE, YOU'RE NOT IN
TROUBLE BUT YOU HAVE TO REALIZE
WHAT YOU JUST DID AS A CITY.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE LANDLOCKED AND
WE HAVE AN EXTREMELY LIMITED
SUPPLY OF INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS.
SO WE HAD TO BE REALLY CAREFUL
THAT, YOU KNOW, WHEN AT ALL
POSSIBLE THEY SERVE THAT
PURPOSE BECAUSE ONCE THEY'RE
GONE THEY'RE GONE.
SO WHAT YOU DID BASICALLY TOOK
THAT PARCEL OUT OF THE
INVENTORY MAYBE FOREVER.
POINT BEING OUR SITES ARE
FINITE.
THIS IS A THIRTY YEAR PLAN.
LET'S TREAT THEM LIKE THE
VALUABLE RESOURCE THAT THEY ARE
.
THIS IS THE VACANCY RATE FOR
INDUSTRIAL.
SO ESSENTIALLY NON OFFICE
BUILDINGS.
TWENTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET AND
OVER WHICH APPEARS TO BE
TALKING TO SOME COMMERCIAL REAL
REALTORS.
OUR SWEET SPOT FOR BUSINESSES
THIS TYPE IN THE CITY THIS IS A
MAP SHOWING THOSE SITES THE
GRAY ONES ARE LEASED, THE BLUE
TICKS ARE AVAILABLE.
YOU CAN SEE THE CONCENTRATED NO
SURPRISE THERE.
YOU CAN ALSO SEE THAT THERE IS
NOT A BIG INVENTORY OF SITES
OUT THERE.
>> WE HEAR ABOUT THE DEMAND FOR
HOUSING A LOT.
IT'S REAL.
THIS IS NOT AS LOUD AS HOUSING
BUT THAT DEMAND IS THERE ONE
POINT SIX BILLION DOLLARS THE
UNIVERSITY SPENDS ONE POINT SIX
ANNUALLY ON RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT MORE THAN ANY OTHER
PUBLIC UNIVERSITY IN THE
COUNTRY.
THAT IS A HUGE COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE IN THAT FIELD THAT WE
NEED TO CONTINUE TO LEVERAGE
AND TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINE.
THIS IS FROM SPARKE.
THEY SAY IN THE LAST TEN YEARS
OUR REGION HAS LAUNCHED MORE
THAN TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY NINE
STARTUPS IN WHAT WAS A TWO
HUNDRED AND FIFTY WHAT YES.
BUT TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINE
STARTUPS OUTPERFORMING EVEN
AREAS LIKE THE RESEARCH
TRIANGLE AND SILICON VALLEY IN
SOME CATEGORIES.
>> AND STARTING THIS YEAR THE
STATE IS INTRODUCING
R&D TAX
CREDIT.
COMBINE THAT WITH THE FACT THAT
WE NOW HAVE SHINY NEW ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE AND I
BELIEVE OUR BETTER POSITION
THAN EVER TO ATTRACT AND RETAIN
CUTTING EDGE BUSINESSES.
>> BUT THE TRUTH IS BECAUSE
OF OUR EXTREMELY LIMITED SITE
INVENTORY BULLOUS YOU KNOW,
MANY BUSINESSES PITTSFIELD CYO
IPSI THAT'S STILL A WIN IS
BETTER THAN THAT OF OUR REGION
COMPLETELY.
BUT I DON'T WANT TO
INADVERTENTLY TAKE US OUT
OF CONTENTION PERMANENTLY FOR
SOMETHING THAT WE DO REALLY
WELL BECAUSE WE'RE TRYING TO
OF TODAY'S PROBLEMS SO KEEP IT
BRIEF.
SO FIVE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
THIS OFFICER'S OPINION ON THE
PLAN.
>> ONE EXERCISE CAUTION WITH
EMPLOYMENT GENERATING AREAS.
SO IN LOOKING AT CREATING NEW
ZONING DISTRICTS AND HOW TO
ADDRESS SOME OF THESE
EMPLOYMENT AREAS ALREADY IN
LATE INDUSTRIAL CAN AND DOES
WORK IN CONCERT WITH HOUSING,
IT DOESN'T IT DOESN'T HAVE TO
BE ONE OR THE OTHER CITIES CAN
DO THIS.
THERE ARE EXAMPLES SOME OF OUR
PEER CITIES HAVE DONE IT.
SOME HAVE NOT HAVE TO BE VERY,
VERY CAREFUL WITH HOW IT'S
STRUCTURED SO WE DON'T LOSE OUR
ABILITY TO GROW BUSINESSES IN
THE FUTURE TRANSITION ZONES
THESE ARE A HUGE, GREAT
OPPORTUNITY.
LET'S CONSIDER ALLOWING LOW
TECH OR R&D USES IN THESE ZONES
AND NOT BE OVERLY BURDENSOME
BURDENSOME ON DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS ESPECIALLY ALONG
ARTERIALS WHERE RETAIL OR
SERVICE USES MIGHT NOT WORK,
RECOGNIZE AND ADDRESS BARRIERS
FOR REDEVELOPMENT.
THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER INCLUDES SOME REALLY
GOOD POINTS BUT IT COULD
BENEFIT FROM A CLEAR POLICY
STATEMENT THAT THE CITY IS OPEN
TO USING INCENTIVES.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO NAME THE
INCENTIVES.
JUST TALK ABOUT THE FACT THAT
WE'RE WILLING TO USE THEM TO
SUPPORT PROJECTS OUR CORE
INDUSTRIES LIKE BIO ADVANCED
R&D MOBILITY, HIGH TECH AND
ALSO WHERE APPROPRIATE
INCENTIVES FOR NEW HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AT ALL INCOME
LEVELS FOR DENSITY IS NOT A
STANDALONE VIRTUE.
HIGHER POPULATION DENSITY WILL
GET US WHERE WE WANT TO BE ON
MANY GOALS BUT LET'S ENSURE
THAT THIS IS TAKEN IN
CONJUNCTION WITH QUALITY
OF PLACE AND QUALITY OF LIFE IN
MIND.
I APARTMENTS OBVIOUSLY PROVIDE
SHELTER BUT YOU ALSO KNOW THAT
TOO MANY THEY ARE JUST ASSETS
ON A BALANCE SHEET NOT ALL
DEVELOPERS OR INVESTORS BUT BUT
SOME.
LET'S MAKE SURE THAT WHAT'S
GETS BUILT STILL CONTRIBUTES TO
OUR EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH QUALITY
OF LIFE AND IS SUPPORTED BY
INFRASTRUCTURE, PARKS, SCHOOLS
AND COMMUNITY AMENITIES THAT
SUPPORT LONG TERM VIABILITY.
FINE FINALLY FIVE I THINK LONG
TERM THIS IS THE THIRTY YEAR
PLAN WHICH IS A LONG TIME BUT
DEVELOPING A SITE IS OFTEN A
ONE HUNDRED PLUS YEAR DECISION
THAT CAN MEANINGFULLY ALTER NOT
JUST THE SITE BUT WHAT GROWS
AROUND IT.
LET'S BUILD A FLEXIBLE
RESILIENT FRAMEWORK THAT ALLOWS
US TO GROW RESPONSIBLY IN THE
DECADES AHEAD.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR TIME AND
ATTENTION.
I CAN'T IMAGINE WHAT A HEAVY
LIFT THIS MUST BE FOR ALL
OF YOU KNOW WHATEVER THE FINAL
PRODUCT IS I WILL WORK TO
IMPLEMENT IT AND WITH IT I'D BE
HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY OF YOUR
QUESTIONS BUT I WON'T BE
OFFENDED IF YOU DON'T HAVE ANY
EITHER.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
PRESENTATION, MR. GIANT.
ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONERS, WHO
HAS A QUESTION.
COMMISSIONER NORTON, CAN YOU
BRING YOUR MIKE CLOSER?
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR COMING TONIGHT
AND FOR SHARING YOUR THOUGHTS.
TWO QUESTIONS MAYBE I'LL THROW
THEM BOTH OUT AND THEN YOU CAN
ANSWER THEM.
THE FIRST IS OF THE TWO HUNDRED
AND FIFTY YOU START UPS THAT
HAPPENED.
WHAT KINDS OF BUILDINGS DID
THEY GO INTO AND WERE THEY
WOULD THEY BE INCOMPATIBLE WITH
BEING NEXT TO A RESIDENTIAL
UNIT?
SO IN OTHER WORDS, GETTING TO
YOUR QUESTION ABOUT WHERE YOUR
STATEMENT ABOUT R&D DOESN'T
HAVE TO BE COMPATIBLE WITH
RESIDENTIAL, THAT'S THE FIRST
QUESTION AND THEN THE SECOND
QUESTION IS YOUR COMMENT.
I TOTALLY GET THE IDEA THAT I'M
NOT A FAN OF CONVENTIONAL
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THAT WAS
LET'S GIVE HUGE TAX BREAKS
BUSINESSES TO LURE THEM HERE
AND THEN THEY DON'T COME OR
THEY COME AND THEN THEY LEAVE.
I TOTALLY GET THAT THE AMOUNT
OF THE VALUE OF A PLACE IS A
MUCH STRONGER UM TO COMPANIES
THAT YOU WANT TO BRING IN.
SO I ALSO GET WE DON'T WANT
DENSITY TO KILL THE GOOSE THAT
WAS LAYING THE GOLDEN EGG.
WHAT ARE YOUR RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR HOW WE DO YOUR THIRD AND
FOURTH BULLET WHICH IS AN
ENCOURAGING DEVELOPMENT BUT
MAKING SURE THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN
IN A WAY THAT DESTROYS THE
AMENITY VALUE OF THE PLACE THAT
MAKES IT AN ATTRACTIVE PLACE
FOR BUSINESSES TO BE.
SO IT'S EASY TO SAY WE SHOULD
DO THAT.
WHAT I'M GOING TO WOULD LIKE TO
HEAR FROM YOU YOUR THOUGHTS ON
HOW DO WE DO THAT YOU'RE RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
SO THE FIRST OF THE TYPE
OF BUSINESSES IT'S A WIDE RANGE
AND IT'S NOT A SITUATION WHERE
THEY ALL, YOU KNOW, ESTABLISH
IN IN CITY LIMITS OF ANN ARBOR.
IN FACT, PROBABLY A LOT OF THEM
PROBABLY DID NOT SPARK FOCUSES
ON TECH STARTUPS OR TECH
BUSINESSES.
I DON'T HAVE AN EXACT PROFILE
OF WHAT THEY WERE.
I WISH I DID IN LOOKING AT THE
INVENTORY OF INDUSTRIAL SITES.
I MEAN A LOT OF THEM ARE SMALL
BUSINESSES.
IT'S A HUGE MIX IN THOSE AREAS.
SOME OF THEM ARE LABS, SOME
OF THEM ARE JUST ENTERTAINMENT
FACILITIES.
>> I MEAN IT'S A HUGE RANGE.
ARE THEY INCOMPATIBLE WITH
RESIDENTIAL USES?
>> NO.
NO THEY'RE NOT.
UM, I THINK THAT WHEN YOU LOOK
AT THE SITES THAT ARE THERE AND
WHETHER THAT'S THE HIGHEST AND
BEST USE EVEN IN THAT INDUSTRY,
THEY'RE NOT I THINK A LOT
OF THEM ARE RIPE FOR
REDEVELOPMENT AND SO MAKING
SURE THAT LIKE THE SITES FOR
YOU JUST TEAR SOMETHING DOWN OR
REBUILD SOMETHING THAT WE CAN
CONTINUE TO BE COMPLIANT WITH
RESIDENTIAL USES SURROUNDING
IT.
BUT I MEAN IF YOU IF YOU IF YOU
DRIVE DOWN INDUSTRIAL THERE'S
RESIDENTIAL RIGHT ACROSS THE
STREET THAT CAN WORK.
MY POINT IS JUST TO BE REALLY
CAREFUL ABOUT CREATING A
SITUATION WHERE SOMEBODY WHO
WANTED TO BE SOMEONE WHO WANTED
TO LOCATE IN THE CITY DIDN'T
BECAUSE OF THE PERCEIVED
INCOMPATIBILITY BETWEEN WHAT
EXISTS AND WHAT WAS AVAILABLE
IN TERMS OF SITES IN TERMS
OF EMPHASIZING QUALITY OF TECH
.
>> I'M A HUGE BELIEVER IN THAT
MYSELF.
UM, I YOU KNOW, IN MY YOU KNOW
THIS I TALKED TO A LOT
OF DEVELOPERS TALK TO A FAIR
AMOUNT OF BUSINESSES AND YOU
KNOW, THEY EMBRACE THAT TOO
THAT IT DRIVES THEIR
EMPLOYMENT.
THEY DON'T YOU KNOW, IT'S HARD
TO FIND EMPLOYEES IN A CITY
THAT DOESN'T OFFER THE THINGS
THAT WE OFFER.
SO I THINK WE'RE A STEP AHEAD
IN THAT AREA.
BUT THE REALITY IS TOO THAT IT
IS REALLY EXPENSIVE TO DEVELOP
AND A LOT OF COMPANIES CAN KIND
OF CHOOSE A LITTLE BIT WHERE
THEY WANT TO BE.
SO YOU DON'T WANT TO GET INTO
THE GAME WHERE YOU'RE JUST LIKE
WHO CAN GIVE US THE BIGGEST
HANDOUT TO LOCATE HERE?
YOU DON'T WANT TO DO THAT.
AND LUCKILY WE DON'T HAVE TO DO
THAT THE WAY THAT OTHER
COMMUNITIES DO BECAUSE WE DO
HAVE A REALLY EDUCATED
WORKFORCE.
>> WE CAN WE CAN OFFER THAT
RATHER THAN JUST LIKE
CHEAP LAND OR YOU KNOW,
HANDOUTS.
BUT WHEN DEVELOPMENT COSTS ARE
SO HIGH THAT IT JUST DOESN'T
MAKE SENSE FROM A FINANCIAL
STANDPOINT TO DEVELOP IN SOME
CASES IT MAY MAKE SENSE TO LOOK
AT SOME TYPE OF INCENTIVE FOR
THAT FOR THAT FOR THAT USE
WHETHER IT'S JUST LIKE SITE
PREPARATION TEARING DOWN WHAT'S
THERE AND REMEDIATING IT.
IF THERE'S AN INFRASTRUCTURE
UPGRADE THAT THAT NEEDS TO
OCCUR, I DON'T WANT TO
AUTOMATICALLY SAY NO TO THAT
COMPANY BECAUSE IT DOESN'T
AUTOMATICALLY PENCIL OUT WHEN
WE WOULD OFFER, YOU KNOW,
POTENTIALLY GOOD JOBS BUILDING
AN INDUSTRY CLUSTER AND
SOMETHING THAT WE'RE REALLY
GOOD AT.
SO IT'S A COMPLICATED QUESTION
YOU TAKE ON A CASE BY CASE
BASIS.
I THINK THAT LIKE QUALITY
OF LIFE AMENITIES PLANE THAT
THAT JUST AS MUCH AS EVERYTHING
ELSE BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY
SOMETIMES IT IS LIKE A
FINANCIAL DECISION.
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS IN PART
BECAUSE I'VE LIVED IN ANN ARBOR
FOR A REALLY LONG TIME AND I
HAVE LIVED IN OTHER PLACES.
>> I LIVED IN BOULDER, I LIVED
IN BOSTON AND BUT I GREW UP IN
ANN ARBOR AND I GREW UP ON THE
NORTHEAST SIDE OF ANN ARBOR AND
MANY YEARS AGO THAT WAS WHERE
ALL THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
WAS WAS AND WHERE IT WAS GOING
TO CONTINUE AND THAT WAS THE
ASSUMPTION AND THAT WAS WHAT
THE ZONING WAS.
>> AND THEN ONE DAY, YOU KNOW,
PICK UP THE OLD ANN ARBOR
NEWS AND PFIZER HAS MOVED AWAY
AND THEY'RE GETTING RID OF ALL
THEIR SPACE AND THAT WAS
ABSOLUTELY SHOCKING AND
HORRIFYING AND YOU KNOW, THE
CITY NOBODY KNEW WHAT WAS GOING
TO HAPPEN AND WHAT HAPPENED WAS
A LOT OF THAT WENT SOUTH.
SO THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
AND YOU'LL SEE ON YOUR LITTLE
MAP LIKE MOST OF THOSE SITES
ARE SOUTH OF THE CITY WHICH WAS
NOT WHAT WAS EXPECTED.
A LOT OF DEVELOPMENT WENT SOUTH
.
THE NORTHEAST SIDE KIND
OF LINGERED FOR A LONG TIME AND
THEN THE UNIVERSITY BOUGHT AND
GRADUALLY HAS BUILT SPACE.
SO I SAY THAT TO SAY THIS IS
HOW DO WE KNOW HOW DO WE KNOW
IF WE'RE GOING TO RESIST OR TO
RESTRICT HOUSING IN A PLACE
THAT ENDS UP NOT PROVIDING MUCH
OF ANYTHING?
>> WHAT SAVE THE NORTHEAST SIDE
WAS THERE WERE A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO LIVED THERE AND AND THAT
MEANT THAT THOSE LITTLE MOM AND
POP STORES STILL STAYED.
THERE WAS YOU KNOW AND THAT
KIND OF PICKED WHEN THE
INDUSTRY LEFT.
>> SO WHAT WORRIES ME ABOUT
KIND OF KEEPING SPACE FOR
INDUSTRY IS ONE A LOT OF THESE
I MEAN IN YOUR IMAGES YOU
SHOWED HUGE SWATHS OF GREEN
GRASS AND BIG PARKING LOTS AND
AND
A LOT OF THOSE INDUSTRIAL
USES ARE THE ONE THAT I'VE
TALKED ABOUT, YOU KNOW, DON'T
EMPLOY THAT MANY PEOPLE THERE.
>> THEY ARE BIG SPACES BUT
DON'T NECESSARILY EMPLOY A LOT
OF PEOPLE.
>> IT DOESN'T MEAN THEY
SHOULDN'T BE HERE BUT SO WE
KNOW WE NEED HOUSING.
IT IS TRUE WE WE DON'T WANT TO
BE JUST I MEAN WE'RE ALREADY
KIND OF A ONE HORSE TOWN BUT WE
DON'T WANT TO BE EVEN MORE SO
THAT WAY.
>> BUT HOW DO WE KEEP YOU KNOW,
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT BEING VERY
CAREFUL NOT TO NOT TO HAMPER
NEW DEVELOPMENT IN THAT WAY AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, HOW DO WE
DO THAT?
>> I MEAN THIS IS NOT JUST A
QUESTION FOR YOU BUT LIKE THE
QUESTION THAT WE TACKLE IS HOW
DO WE DO THAT KNOWING THAT WE
NEED MORE HOUSING AND KNOWING
THAT THOSE BUSINESSES ARE MAYBE
EPHEMERAL OR YOU KNOW, THERE'S
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY NINE
STARTUPS OVER THE LAST X NUMBER
OF YEARS BUT MAYBE SOME OF THEM
ARE HERE, MAYBE SOME OF THEM
AREN'T.
WOULD THEY HAVE STAYED IF THEY
HAD A BIG SHINY GREEN LONDA BUT
THEY'RE BIG BUILDING ON WOULD
THEY YOU KNOW WHAT SO IT'S JUST
HARD FOR ME TO SAY OH WE NEED
TO BE CAREFUL AND SAVE THAT
SPACE AND MAKE SURE THAT WE
HAVE ENOUGH WHEN WE KNOW WE
NEED HOUSING AND WE DON'T KNOW
BECAUSE OF OUR VACANCY RATES
AND WE DON'T KNOW NECESSARILY
WHERE THOSE WHERE THOSE
STARTUPS WENT OR WHAT WHAT WE
COULD DO TO MAKE IT MORE
ENTICING FOR THEM OR MAYBE THEY
DON'T WANT TO BE ON THE SOUTH
SIDE.
MAYBE THEY WANT TO BE ON THE
NORTH SIDE AND WE'VE SAVED ALL
THE SPACE ON THE SOUTH SIDE AND
NOT ON THE NORTH SIDE.
>> SO THAT'S WHAT I WHEN LIKE
AT SOUTH GOOD IT IS LIKE OH WE
NEED TO SAVE SPACE BUT WE KNOW
THAT WE NEED HOUSING AND AND SO
IT'S A LITTLE HARD FOR ME TO
SAY OH WELL WE'RE GOING TO SAVE
THIS THREE PERCENT OR WHATEVER
FOR HOUSING OR ENCOURAGE THIS
SPACE FOR HOUSING FOR
INDUSTRIAL OR R&D BUT WHICH
MIGHT RESTRICT SOME OTHER
THINGS SO THAT'S JUST KIND
OF WHERE I'M GRAPPLING OF IT.
>> IT DOESN'T ALWAYS WORK OUT
THE WAY YOU THINK LIKE WE HAD
PLANNED FOR A LOT MORE INDUSTRY
AND R&D IN THE NORTHEAST SIDE
THAT DIDN'T WORK OUT AND IS
ONLY NOW KIND OF COMING BACK
FIFTY SOME YEARS LATER OR NOT
FIFTY YEARS AFTER PFIZER AND
AND SO IT WAS KIND OF KEEPING
SOME SPACES JUST FOR THAT SEEMS
POTENTIALLY PROBLEMATIC TO ME
AND SO THAT'S JUST WHERE MY
HEAD IS.
I MEAN THERE'S A LOT I GUESS
WHAT I WOULD SAY IS I I
UNDERSTAND THAT THERE WAS A
CONVERSATION A LONG
CONVERSATION ABOUT WHETHER TO
RESTRICT I'M SAYING TO RESTRICT
SAYING TO JUST BE VERY CAREFUL
IN CRAFTING ZONING REGULATION
THAT YOU'RE NOT PRECLUDING
SOMETHING THAT COULD HAPPEN IN
THE FUTURE FROM HAPPENING TWO
PERCENT OF THE LAND TOO.
>> I IT'S IT IS NOT A BIG PART
OF THE CITY.
THIS IS JUST LIKE AN OPTION
NOTHING IS THE ONLY OPTION
THERE BUT IT IS THE ONLY PLACE
WHERE IT IS AN OPTION.
SO JUST BEING BEING CONSCIOUS
OF THAT YEAH.
I DON'T KNOW WHERE ALL THOSE
COMPANIES WENT.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO THINK THAT
SOME OF THEM COULD HAVE BEEN
LOCATED HERE.
I DON'T KNOW THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE JUST THAT IS JUST AN
UNKNOWABLE THING.
I LOOK AT A COMPANY LIKE
SARTORIUS THAT BUILT RECENTLY
IN RESEARCH PARK THAT'S A
COMPANY THAT YOU KNOW, IT'S A
GLOBAL COMPANY, GOOD HIGH
PAYING JOBS.
IT WANTS TO EXPAND 200
EMPLOYEES HERE.
>> THE UNIVERSITY IS FORTY FIVE
THOUSAND AND SO I'M NOT BUT I
MEAN THESE TAXES SARTORIUS
WANTS TO GROW AND CZARTORYSKI A
SINGLE SITE.
>> RIGHT.
CAN JUST REALLY QUICKLY.
SO HOW HOW DO YOU BALANCE WHAT
YOU JUST SAID ABOUT SOTIRIOS
BECAUSE I THINK THAT'S A GREAT
EXAMPLE TO WORK WITH WHERE THEY
HAVE ALL THE TAX DEFERMENT SO
WE'RE NOT GOING TO SEE ANY
TAXES FROM THEM FOR WHAT TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE THIRTY YEARS I
DON'T KNOW THE TERMS OF IT.
I WOULD BE SURPRISED IF IT WAS
THAT LONG BUT I DON'T KNOW I
MEAN IT WAS A BROWNFIELD WASN'T
IT.
IT WAS A TAX ABATEMENT AND SO
IT TO THE TAX ABATEMENT I THINK
WE'RE TWELVE YEARS AND THEN
DIDN'T THE STATE HAVE AN
INCENTIVE ON TOP OF THAT.
>> YEAH I'M NOT AWARE OF THAT
LOCAL HAD BECAUSE YOU HAVE THE
TAXES FOR TWELVE YEARS RIGHT.
>> SO AND SO THAT'S THE PIECE
IS TO SORT OF HELP.
WELL I THINK ONE QUESTION ABOUT
HOW ARE WE TO IT'S MY TURN
SORRY I JUST WANT TO ASK THAT
SPECIFIC ONE BECAUSE WE WERE
TALKING ABOUT SOME TERRORISTS
BUT I'LL HEAR FROM OTHER
COMMISSIONERS AND THEN I'LL ASK
MY QUESTION.
COMMISSIONER MILSOM SO I DID
NOT MAKE THE PUBLIC APOLOGY
SORRY I WAS IN NEW YORK AND GOT
OFF THE AIRPLANE.
>> BUT THIS MORNING I WAS AT
NEW LAB AT THE END AT THE NAVY
NAVY YARD IN NEW YORK CITY AND
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT ACTUALLY
GOT BROUGHT UP IN THE COURSE
OF THE CONVERSATION AND THIS IS
A PLACE THAT'S LIKE AN
INCUBATOR FOR STARTUPS BUT IT'S
LIKE CREATIVE SPACE WHICH I
THAT'S NOT ME.
SO I DIDN'T I'M NOT CREATIVE
ANYWAY.
>> BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
THEY SAID IS WE DO THINGS HERE.
IT'S REALLY HARD TO DO ANYWHERE
ELSE IN THE CITY BECAUSE
BECAUSE WE ARE NOT OFFICE WE
CAN'T PAY THE RENTS EFFECTIVELY
AND SOME OF IT WAS ABOUT NOISE
AND SO I'M ACTUALLY AND LIKE
THAT'S THE THEY SAID WE'RE OUR
PROTOTYPING IS THE THING THAT
LIKE WE NEED TO BE IN A
PARTICULAR PLACE RIGHT.
BUT ALSO THAT IT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO HAVE THIS PLACE
FOR CREATIVES.
>> RIGHT.
SO I GUESS WHAT END AND I'M
CURIOUS AS WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
FLEXIBILITY IN THE TRANSITION
IN PARTICULAR IN THE TWO
PERCENT RATE, IS IT PASSELL
SIZE?
>> IS IT LAND VALUE?
IS IT NOT LIKE WHAT WHAT IS
THAT WE THAT WE NEED
FLEXIBILITY AROUND BECAUSE I
THINK THAT THAT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT GERMANE TO OUR
CONVERSATION TONIGHT AND
PARTICULARLY IF IT'S ABOUT LAND
VALUE BECAUSE I TOOK A LOT
OF THIS TO BE ABOUT LIKE WE
CAN'T YOU CAN'T COMMAND THE
SAME RENTS.
>> RIGHT?
HOW THEN DO YOU PREVENT THE
EXPANSION OF OUR LARGEST
EMPLOYER OF THE CITY SO RIGHT.
I THINK THAT THAT'S THE END.
>> AND ARE THERE SPECIFIC TOOLS
AGAIN THAT WE SHOULD THINK
ABOUT IN OUR IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX OR JUST SAY TOOLS AND
LIKE I DON'T KNOW.
OH SURE.
I THINK I WAS KIND OF DODGIEST
SPECIFIC INCENTIVES BECAUSE YOU
DON'T WANT TO JUST TRY TO MAKE
IT LIKE A LAUNDRY LIST
OF POTENTIAL THINGS.
IT'S JUST LIKE THE CITY WILL
YOU IN MY OLD JOB WE PUT
TOGETHER A PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP DEALS AND EVERY
SINGLE ONE WAS DIFFERENT SO IT
WOULD BE LIKE WELL WHAT SHOULD
WE DO FOR THIS ONE?
IT WAS LIKE IT DEPENDS ON
EVERYTHING.
OK, NOT THE PROJECT BUT IT
DEPENDS ON LIKE THE ECONOMY.
IT DEPENDS ON THE SITE.
I MEAN IT DEPENDS ON A MILLION
THINGS.
SO IT'S REALLY HARD TO GIVE A
SPECIFIC ANSWER TO JUST LIKE A
SPECIFIC INCENTIVE I THINK
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT LIKE
ALMOST LIKE DESIGN STANDARDS TO
POSSIBLY I MEAN AGAIN IF WE'RE
THINKING ABOUT WHEN YOU SAY
FLEXIBILITY LIKE I'M JUST
CURIOUS ABOUT LIKE WHAT DOES
THAT MEAN BECAUSE THAT MAKES
THAT MAKES A LOT OF PEOPLE
NERVOUS EVEN THOUGH I KNOW THAT
WE SHOULD YEAH.
I MEAN I MEAN LIKE I DID NOT
HAVE A LIST OF QUESTIONS BEFORE
I CAME ON SO THIS IS JUST
THINKING OFF THE TOP OF HIS
HEAD IN LOOKING AT LIKE PURSELL
SIZE IF IF IT'S A SMALL PARCEL
THAT WOULD NOT BE A GOOD SPACE
FOR INDUSTRIAL R&D USE.
MAYBE IT BECOMES A BETTER SITE
FOR FOR RESIDENTIAL LOOKING AT
LIKE SOME KIND LIKE SPECIAL
USE.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT TO CALL IT
HERE CONDITIONAL USE WHERE YOU
NEED TO BE A SET OF CERTAIN
CRITERIA THAT DEMONSTRATES THAT
THIS IS A APPROPRIATE USE FOR A
PARCEL THIS SIZE SOME SOMETHING
LIKE THIS THERE'S JUST SOME
STANDARDS TO SAY LIKE YEAH IS
PERMITTED IF YOU MEET THESE
CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS OR IT JUST
THE PARCEL ITSELF OR THE SITE
DOESN'T MEET THESE IS
APPROXIMATE RESIDENTIAL AS
APPROXIMATE TO TRANSIT OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
UM AS FAR AS DESIGN STANDARDS
LIKE THE BUILDING ITSELF OH GOD
I DON'T KNOW I MEAN THERE'S
LIKE PERFORMANCE BASED ZONING
THAT COULD BE SOMETHING TO
CONSIDER.
I DON'T KNOW HOW YOU ALL
REGULATE THAT BUT THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT OTHER
COMMUNITIES DO.
OK, BUT LIKE THERE'S NOT ONE
THING THAT YOU THINK IS DRIVING
OR THAT IT'S GOING TO SHOOT US
IN THE FOOT IN TERMS OF OR
THERE'S NOT ONE SPECIFIC THING
THAT YOU POINT TO TO SAY IT IS
PURSELL SAYS WE NEED TO PROTECT
THE LARGEST PARCELS OR IS I
MEAN ACCESS IS I MEAN THAT'S
REAL.
>> THAT'S WHAT I WAS THINKING
IN MY MIND LIKE IS IT REAL?
I MEAN IS IT RAILROAD ACCESS
LIKE I MEAN I DON'T THINK THAT
IT'S RAILROAD ACCESS BUT I'M
NOT THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
ONE EXAMPLE THAT I MIGHT OFFER
THAT MIGHT FALL INTO THIS
CATEGORY THIS IS THE CITIES
HAVE A LOT OF CONVERSATIONS
WITH THE PROJECT THAT IS
SCHEDULED FOR YOUR UPCOMING
AGENDA HERSELF.
AND SO I THINK THAT THAT'S
THAT'S KIND OF AN EXAMPLE THAT
WE HAVE WE HAVE PUT IN PLACE
FORM BASED STANDARDS THAT ARE
SIGNIFICANTLY ADDING TO THE
COST TO REALIZE THAT PROJECT
AND FORM.
THEREFORE THE CITY IS
UNDERTAKING SOME CONVERSATION
WITH WHAT'S OUR FINANCIAL ROLE
IN THAT.
I WOULD SAY THAT IT THAT COULD
BE KIND OF AN EXAMPLE, RIGHT?
IF WE DIDN'T HAVE A LIMITATION,
FOR EXAMPLE, ON PARKING BEING
STRUCTURED IN THAT PLACE AND WE
JUST ALLOWED CERTAIN PARKING
LOTS THAT WOULD GREATLY REDUCE
THE CORRESPONDING PARKING COST
FOR THAT PROJECT.
BUT WE'VE DESIGN STANDARDS IN
PLACE THAT NECESSITATE THIS
BALANCE THAT I THINK WHAT JOE
IS GETTING AT IT'S LIKE IN THAT
CASE THAT MIGHT BE ONE
FINANCIAL TOOL.
IN ANOTHER CASE IT MIGHT BE A
BROWNFIELD TO IN ANOTHER CASE
IT MIGHT BE A LIFE I FEEL LIKE
BUT I THINK I THINK OF THAT AS
AN EXAMPLE HERE AND THAT IS
BOTH IN REGARDS TO SORT
OF RETAIL HOUSING AND
COMMERCIAL.
>> I I THINK WHAT WE TALKED
ABOUT IT IN SORT OF GETTING RID
OF FOXON AND PUTTING THE
TRANSITIONS ON THERE, I THINK
THAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE GONNA
HAVE TO WRESTLE WITH
IS WHAT
ARE THE DESIGN STANDARDS THAT
WE WANT TO IMPOSE ON THOSE
TRANSITION ZONES IF THERE ARE
ANY WHAT ARE THE ONES THAT
MIGHT START RUNNING AFOUL
OF THIS APPLYING TO THE MAKER
SPACES OR THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY
SPACES OR WHAT HAVE YOU?
SO YEAH SO AND I DON'T LIKE TO
JUMP IN LIKE I DON'T KNOW
JOURNO'S EXACTLY WHAT THOSE
LIMITATIONS ARE BUT I THINK
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S ON MY
MIND IS HOW ARE WE GOING TO
CRAFT THOSE THINGS BECAUSE IT'S
CLEAR WE WANT THEM TO COEXIST.
SO HOW DO WE WHAT IS GOING TO
BE OUR COMFORT LEVEL FOR DESIGN
STANDARDS RELATIONSHIP TO THE
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY SO THAT
WE'RE BEING FLEXIBLE TO PROVIDE
SOME OPPORTUNITIES?
OK, ONE MORE COMMISSIONER.
RIGHT IF THAT'S OK.
I WAS JUST GOING TO JUST CALL
ON YOU AGAIN.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
THE YOU MENTIONED IMPACT FEES
AND ACTUALLY YOU IN TERMS
OF LIKE WE NEED TO BE CAREFUL
ABOUT THESE.
>> RIGHT.
AND THE PRESENTATION BEFORE
YOURS WAS ABOUT HOW DEVELOPMENT
THAT'S COMING IS GOING TO PAY
FOR THIS EXPANSION.
>> LIKE I'M CURIOUS HOW WE
SHOULD WHAT KIND OF LANGUAGE WE
MIGHT THINK ABOUT IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX BECAUSE
ACTUALLY I SEE THAT AS THE THE
REGULAR THING THAT'S REALLY OUT
OF OUR HANDS AND BUT THAT I
THINK IN ORDER TO REALIZE THIS
PLAN WE NEED TO MAKE SURE IS
ADDRESSED AND SO IF YOU HAVE
ANY THOUGHTS BECAUSE THAT
WASN'T ON YOUR TOP FIVE.
BUT DOES THAT FIT INTO
REDEVELOPMENT OR SOMETHING LIKE
I'M JUST CURIOUS.
I THINK THE POINT IS THAT
ANYTHING THAT ADDS TO THE COST
OF A PROJECT THAT'S NOT PART
OF THE PROJECT AND IT'S NOT
GOING TO INCREASE RENTS IS
THERE IS A LINE WHERE A
DEVELOPER CANNOT CROSS IT AND
CONTINUE TO DO THEIR PROJECT
AND IF WE STILL WANT THAT TYPE
OF DEVELOPMENT TO HAPPEN, YOU
KNOW, SOMETHING'S GOT TO GIVE
IMPACT FEES OR HOW WE FUND OUR
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
SYSTEMS.
YOU CAN'T REALLY GET AROUND
THOSE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS THAT
YOU KNOW, IN MY TWO AND A HALF
MONTHS HERE I'M TRYING TO BE
REALLY CONSCIOUS TO NOT LIKE
SAY THE WRONG THING BUT AND
TALKING TO A LOT OF DEVELOPERS
AND BUSINESSES, THEY WILL TALK
ABOUT THINGS THAT CONTINUE TO
BE ADDED ON TO THE PROJECT AS
THE PROJECT PROGRESSES THAT NO
ONE EXTEND THE APPROVAL
TIMELINE NO TO LIKE I SAID
DON'T INCREASE YOU KNOW, THEIR
RENT.
THEY DON'T MAKE THE PROJECT ANY
MORE FEASIBLE.
UM, LIKE ONE DEVELOPER SAID AND
THEY'RE NOT ALL BAD PEOPLE.
A LOT OF THEM ARE GREAT.
A LOT OF THEM REALLY DO CARE
ABOUT THE COMMUNITY SAID SOFT
COSTS HERE ARE 25 TO 50 PERCENT
MORE THAN ANY OTHER COMMUNITY
THAT I'VE WORKED IN.
WHY?
WELL, THE PROCESS IS JUST SO
MUCH LONGER AND SO MUCH MORE
UNPREDICTABLE AND SO THOSE ARE
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT FITS INTO
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I FEEL LIKE THERE'S A PLACE FOR
IT IN THERE.
BUT THOSE ARE THOSE ARE REAL
THINGS THAT WE CAN ADDRESS BY
BEING VERY CLEAR ON THE FRONT
END IF YOU HAVE TO PAY AN
IMPACT FEE, YOU HAD TO PAY AN
IMPACT FEE DAY ONE.
YOU KNOW THAT.
BUT IF IT'S SOMETHING MORE LIKE
SIX MONTHS DOWN THE ROAD OH BUT
YOU GUYS NEED TO REPLACE THIS
MAIN IN THE STREET AT THE COST
OF TWO HUNDRED FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS LIKE THAT IS THAT IS AN
UNANTICIPATED PROJECT COST THAT
CAN MAKE IT FEASIBLE AND
FEASIBLE.
SO ADDRESSING SOME OF THOSE
THINGS ARE CRITICAL, ABSOLUTELY
CRITICAL.
CAN'T GET AROUND SOME THINGS
BUT JUST MAKING SURE THAT THOSE
ARE CLEAR, UNAMBIGUOUS FROM THE
FRONT AND IS IS JUST SO SO
IMPORTANT GREAT.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT AND THEN MANAGER
LEONARD, I WANT TO.
>> DID YOU WANT TO SAY
SOMETHING DIRECTLY IN RESPONSE
TO THAT IF YOU'RE OK WITH LIKE
SO IN REGARDS TO YOU MR. GIANT
SAYING THE WRONG THINGS AS A
NEW MEMBER TO THE COMMUNITY, I
JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR WHO'S
USING THE TERM IMPACT IS PRETTY
GENERALLY A LOT OF TIME AND
PLANNING THAT CAN HAVE REALLY
BROAD IMPLICATIONS.
THERE ARE SOME STATES FOR
EXAMPLE, THAT EVERY DEVELOPMENT
THAT HAPPENS PAYS WHAT IS
CALLED AND THAT MIGHT BE
CHARGED TO THE SCHOOL SYSTEM A
CHARGE OF THE PARK SYSTEM, A
CHARGE TO THE TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM HERE IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
WE HAVE SEVERE LIMITATIONS ON
OUR ABILITY TO DO THAT.
NONETHELESS, WHAT HE'S TALKING
TO AND I THINK ONE OF THE FEW
DAYS HE'S HEARING FOR IT WE
STILL WITHIN THE CONFINES
OF STATE LAW WE REQUIRE
CONTRIBUTIONS OR IMPROVEMENTS
TO UTILITIES AS WE JUST TALKED
ABOUT.
THOSE ARE VERY SPECIFICALLY
STRUCTURED.
BUT I JUST WANT TO
DIFFERENTIATE IMPACT TERMS
IMPACT THIS CAN HAVE A MUCH
BROADER CONNOTATION THAN WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT HERE.
SO I WANT TO PICK UP WITH KIND
OF THE LAST THING YOU'RE SAYING
AND I DON'T KNOW IF I HAVE A
QUESTION IN HERE OR I'M GOING
TO SAY THINGS THEN MAYBE YOU'LL
SAY THINGS BACK TO ME.
>> UH, SO I ACTUALLY WORK FOR A
DEVELOPER THAT DEFINITELY IS
NOT HOW WE'VE HEARD MANY PEOPLE
DESCRIBING DEVELOPERS AS JUST
PEOPLE HERE LIKE PEOPLE THAT
ARE TRYING BASICALLY GET RICH
OFF OF THE BACKS OF PEOPLE.
I DON'T THINK WE'RE MAKING
MONEY FOR OUR DEVELOPMENT.
LET ME JUST SAY THAT AND IT'S
DEVELOPMENT RIGHT NOW IS REALLY
HARD.
LIKE YOU SAID, ALL THE REASONS
WHY THERE'S REALLY HIGH
CONSTRUCTION COSTS THAT MEANS
HOUSING PRICES HAVE TO BE
HIGHER.
YOU NEED TO FIND BUYERS THAT
CAN BEAR THE COSTS TAXES OF THE
INTEREST RATES IN CONJUNCTION
WITH THAT, AS YOU JUST SAID,
THE SOFT COSTS HERE ARE REALLY
CHALLENGING.
IT'S TAKEN US IT TOOK US OVER
SIX MONTHS TO GET A BUILDING
PERMIT FOR A 12 UNIT
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING IN THE
CITY NEEDS MORE ATTAINABLE
HOUSING.
SO I THINK YOU'RE SAYING ABOUT
PUTTING THESE THINGS INTO THIS
MATRIX INTO THE PLAN IS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
>> PART OF WHAT I'M STRUGGLING
WITH WITH THIS IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX THAT WE'LL GET TO NEXT
THAT I'VE JUST ALWAYS HAD
TROUBLE WITH WITH THINGS LIKE
THIS.
IT'S NOT THIS SPECIFICALLY.
IT'S LIKE THERE AREN'T CONCRETE
THINGS LIKE I AM I'M AN
ENGINEER BY TRAINING.
I VERY BLACK AND WHITE WITH
STUFF LIKE I WANT TO KNOW
EXACTLY I WANT THIS TO BE LESS
VAGUE.
I WANT TO KNOW LIKE THIS TYPE
OF PROJECT SHOULD BE USING A
DIFFERENT WHATEVER.
AND YOU SAID LIKE WE SHOULD
MAKE A CLEAR CLEAR POLICY
STATEMENT WHERE YOU'RE OK.
>> WE'RE OPEN TO USING
INCENTIVES.
I GUESS MAYBE THIS IS A
QUESTION WHERE WOULD YOU SEE
ADDING THESE THINGS IN IN THE
PLAN ITSELF IN THE LANGUAGE
WHERE IT TALKS ABOUT THE
ECONOMY IN GENERAL, ARE THERE
THINGS YOU WOULD DO TO
STRENGTHEN THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX IF YOU'VE HAD A CHANCE
TO LIKE LOOK AT IT PARTICULARLY
AROUND ANY SORT OF INCENTIVE
FOR LIKE GETTING THROUGH THE
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS BECAUSE
THAT COSTS A LOT OF TIME AND
MONEY TO DEVELOPERS AND IT
NEVER HAS A REPUTATION FOR
PEOPLE NOT WANTING TO COME AND
BUILD HERE NECESSARILY BECAUSE
IT TAKES SO LONG TO GET
THROUGH.
>> SURE.
IF I IF I WERE DOING IT YOU
HAVE YOUR YOUR GOAL THEN YOU'RE
THREE OR FOUR POLICIES WOULD
MAKE IT ONE OF THOSE POLICIES I
LIKE WHEN I READ ABOUT IT IN
BACKGROUND LIKE IT DOESN'T MEAN
ANYTHING TO ME AND I CAN'T
POINT IT LIKE I CAN BE LIKE TO
A DEVELOPER.
OH WELL I MEAN IT SAYS THE WORD
INCENTIVES THREE OR FOUR TIMES
THROUGHOUT THE PLAN LIKE NO WE
CAN SUPPORT THIS BECAUSE
THERE'S A POLICY THAT SAYS WE
SUPPORT IT IN TERMS I MEAN WHEN
I SAY, YOU KNOW, BE BROAD AND
OPEN AND WITH WHAT YOU CALL AN
INCENTIVE LIKE IT DOESN'T NEED
TO BE A HANDOUT OR MONETARY IT
CAN BE LOGISTICAL SUPPORT.
IT CAN BE EXPEDITING.
IT CAN BE A WHOLE LOT OF THINGS
I MEAN I FEEL FOR YOU ALL THAT
YOU HAVEN'T EVEN GOT TO THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX YOU'RE
PART OF THE NIGHT.
YEAH, BUT LIKE WOLF BUT JUST
LIKE I WOULD FRAME IT SOMETHING
LIKE THAT AND THEN THE PLAN
ITSELF IN THE MATRIX I MEAN I
WOULD DIRECT STAFF TO COME UP
WITH WAYS TO, YOU KNOW,
FACILITATE EXPEDITE PROCESS.
I MEAN I DON'T KNOW I'M JUST
THINKING OUT LOUD SPECIFIC
POLICY LANGUAGE IN THE PLAN
ITSELF THAT TALKS ABOUT
APPROPRIATE USE I THINK WOULD
GO A LONG WAY
.
ALL RIGHT.
I WANT TO COME BACK TO CERTAIN
AREAS JUST FOR A SECOND SO
THERE ARE TWO THINGS THAT WERE
IN THERE.
ONE, IT'S TOUGH WHICH SARTORIUS
THEN GETS TO KEEP ONE POINT SIX
MILLION FOR HAVING BUILT THAT
FOR THE FIRST WHAT FOURTEEN
YEARS AND THEN YOU HAVE THE
FIFTY PERCENT OF THE TAX
ABATEMENT AND THEN ONE POINT
ONE MILLION WENT TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
DID I GET THAT RIGHT?
SO THERE'S DEFINITELY A TWELVE
YEAR TAX ABATEMENT FOR THE
TAXES.
THERE IS A BROWNFIELD PLAN FOR
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIVE
THOUSAND NEW ENVIRONMENTAL
ACTIVITIES AT THAT POINT FIVE
MILLION OF NINE AND THEN ONE
POINT ONE MILLION GOES INTO THE
IS AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR OK SO
THAT SO WHEN WHEN I HEAR YOU
SAY THAT'S A GREAT PROJECT I'M
I'M TRYING TO WEIGH THAT
AGAINST THE DEFERRED TAXES SO I
THINK YOU MEAN SOMETHING
DIFFERENT WHEN YOU SAY THAT
THAT'S A GREAT PROJECT SO COULD
YOU DEFINE LIKE WHAT THAT MEANS
FROM YOUR POINT VIEW?
>> HOW MUCH WAS THAT PURSELL
CONTRIBUTING IN TAX REVENUE
PRIOR TO THE DEVELOPMENT?
>> I DON'T KNOW THAT I DON'T
KNOW.
I MEAN SOMEONE WAS PAYING
SEVENTEEN OR SO THEY WERE
PROBABLY PAYING SOME BUT ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED
THOUSAND COMPARED TO WHAT IT'S
PAYING NOW I WOULD IMAGINE IT'S
A TINY FRACTION OF THAT.
SO I MEAN IT'S KIND OF LIKE A
SITUATION WHERE WE ASSUME THAT
THE PROJECT WOULD HAVE BEEN
BUILT WITHOUT ANY INCENTIVES
AND WOULD BE PAYING YOU KNOW,
FULL BORE ALL THE TAXES.
THAT'S NOT T REALITY OF THE
SITUATION.
THE REALITY IS THE SITE WOULD
HAVE PRESUMABLY WILL BE SITTING
EMPTY.
I MEAN MAYBE SOMEBODY WOULD
COME ALONG AND BEEN LIKE I WILL
DO THIS PROJECT ON MY OWN DIME
.
IT HAD BEEN SITTING EMPTY FOR A
LONG TIME SO THAT WAS EVIDENTLY
NOT THE CASE.
SO THE FACT THAT IT IS
CONTRIBUTING NOW AND THOSE
APARTMENTS WILL WEAR OFF AND IT
WILL CONTRIBUTE BACK AND THE
PEOPLE THAT WORK THERE ARE TAX
PAYING TO HIRE, YOU KNOW,
INCOME I MEAN IT'S LIKE IF YOU
IF YOU DON'T WANT TO
INCENTIVIZE A PROJECT THAT'S A
PHILOSOPHICAL THING.
IT'S VERY HARD TO GET AROUND.
BUT BUT I'D LOOK AT LIKE THERE
IS A PROJECT THAT IS THERE NOW
THERE WASN'T BEFORE THIS IS
WHAT IT TOOK TO GET THERE AND
WAS IT WORTH IT?
THAT'S
THAT'S A THAT'S A TOUGH
CALL TO MAKE BUT IT DOES EXIST
AND IT IS CONTRIBUTING TAXES.
>> SURE.
I MEAN I THINK IT WAS ALWAYS
CONTRIBUTING TO ACCESS.
RIGHT BECAUSE THE TAXES WERE
ALREADY THERE TAXABLE VALUE
INCREASED BY ABOUT ABOUT ONE
MILLION DOLLARS TO ABOUT TEN
MILLION DOLLARS AND OBVIOUSLY
OK.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO I I ACTUALLY HAVE SOME LIKE
COMMENTS THAT I WOULD LOVE FOR
YOUR OFFICE TO HELP US WITH IF
IT'S IF IT'S POSSIBLE.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I'VE
LEARNED IS FROM THE COMMENTS
THAT WE'VE RECEIVED AND I'VE
COUNTED I THINK WE'VE RECEIVED
ABOUT A LITTLE UNDER FOUR
HUNDRED COMMENTS DURING THIS
PROCESS THROUGH DIFFERENT WAYS
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I'VE
HEARD MY NEIGHBOR SAY OVER AND
OVER AGAIN IS ONLY THE
OCCUPANTS OF SINGLE DETACHED
HOUSING UNITS PAY TAXES IN THE
CITY.
>> AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
I'VE LEARNED SITTING AT THIS
TABLE IS EVERYBODY IN THE CITY
PAYS TAXES INCLUDING RENTERS
AND OFTEN RENTERS ARE PAYING
MORE IN TAXES THAN THE OWNERS
OF SINGLE DETACHED HOUSING
UNITS.
>> AND I WONDER AS YOU ARE
TALKING ABOUT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IN THE CITY, I
THINK TAXES ARE A HUGE PART
OF THAT BECAUSE IT FUELS OUR
CITY.
DO YOU HAVE INITIATIVES TO HELP
BEYOND THE DOLLAR BILL BECAUSE
WE HAVE THAT LITTLE DOLLAR BILL
IMAGE WHICH SLICES UP WHERE ALL
THE TAXES GO.
>> I THINK THERE'S JUST THIS
MISCONCEPTION THAT IT'S ONLY
THE PEOPLE WHO GET A PROPERTY
BILL FROM THE CITY ASSESSOR WHO
IS CONTRIBUTING TO THE TAX BASE
OF THE CITY.
>> AND SO I WONDER AS YOU TAKE
ON YOUR ROLE, DO YOU FEEL LIKE
THAT EDUCATION'S THERE BECAUSE
I DON'T FEEL LIKE IT'S OUR TAX
.
IT'S CERTAINLY NOT IN OUR
BYLAWS BUT WE ARE CONTENDING
WITH IT BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE
CONSTANTLY LIKE EVEN IN THE
COMMENTS TODAY THERE ARE
COMMENTS THAT ARE LIKE ONLY THE
TAXPAYERS SHOULD HAVE A VOICE.
AND I WAS LIKE THEY DO YOU ARE
JUST NOT THE ONLY TAX PAYER BUT
PEOPLE THINK THEY ARE THE I'M
MAKING SENSE.
>> OH YEAH OK.
YEAH YEAH.
I'M SURE COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT COULD ATTEST TO
THE FACT THAT TENANTS PAY TAXES
IS JUST LUMPED INTO THEIR RENT.
RIGHT.
IT IS I MEAN YEAH GOES GOES TO
THE BUSINESS OWNER THE BUSINESS
OWNER HAS TO PAY THE TAX BUT
THE BUSINESS TO MAKE SURE THAT
LIKE THAT IT GETS DISTRIBUTED
AMONG THE TENANTS.
THE BUSINESSES OBVIOUSLY PAY
TAXES.
I MEAN THE YEAH IF YOU'RE IF
YOU'RE IF YOU KNOW LIVING AND
WORKING IN THE CITY THERE'S A
THERE'S A GOOD CHANCE YOU'RE
PAYING IT WHETHER DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY.
YEAH.
I THINK THE ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I WOULD LIKE THIS
DEPARTMENT TO MAYBE MAKE A
CLEAR CASE FOR AND LIKE
INCREASING THE TAX BASE IS LIKE
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT ONE OF MY
CHARGES DEFINITELY BUT IT'S
LIKE INCREASE THE TAX BASE.
WHY FOR WHAT I'LL TELL YOU LIKE
WE HAVE A SUPER HIGH QUALITY
OF LIFE HERE BUT MY CAR'S
SUSPENSION HAS NEVER TOOK A
BEATING THEN THE TWO AND A HALF
MONTHS THAT I'VE BEEN HERE I
MEAN THERE ARE WHAT IS THE ONE
HUNDRED AND SIXTY FOUR PARKS
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY TWO
HUNDRED SIXTY TWO YARDS AGAIN
WITH THE EXPANDED I MEAN IT'S
NO SECRET THAT THERE'S SOME
DEFERRED MAINTENANCE THERE
UTILITY EXTENSIONS.
>> I MEAN ALL ALL THE ALL THE
THINGS WE KNOW THAT WE NEED TO
INCREASE OUR TAX BASE TO JUST
DO LIKE THE BASIC THINGS THAT
MAKE A CITY A CITY AND SO IS
MAKING SURE THAT WHEN WE'RE
GETTING NEW DEVELOPMENTS, YOU
KNOW, UP OUT OF THE GROUND THEY
START PAYING TAXES WHETHER IT'S
THE OWNER OF THE BUILDING OR
THE TENANTS CONTRIBUTING AND
THEN GETTING IT SECOND HAND
THAT PEOPLE LIKE KNOW WHAT IS
GOING TOWARDS AND WHY ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IS IMPORTANT AND
HOW IT FITS INTO QUALITY
OF LIFE AND QUALITY OF PLACE
AND ALL THESE OTHER THINGS LIKE
JUST BASIC CITY SERVICES.
I THINK IT'S KIND OF A QUESTION
OF DIFFERENT DIRECTION BUT NO,
I JUST THINK IT'S IT'S HARD FOR
US TO BE THE AGENT THAT
EDUCATES THE PUBLIC ABOUT THAT.
I THINK IT SHOULD SIT SOMEWHERE
ELSE BECAUSE I THINK THE THE
THE THING I'VE HEARD AT THE
TABLE IS WELL WE JUST GIVE
DEVELOPERS WHATEVER THEY WANT
AND I WAS LIKE WOW, DEVELOPERS
DO NOT AGREE WITH THAT SENTENCE
BUT THAT IS THE SENTIMENT.
SO PEOPLE PEOPLE HAVE THAT
BELIEF STRUCTURE AND IT'S HARD
BECAUSE WE HAVE TO THEN WORK
AGAINST THAT BELIEF STRUCTURE.
BUT WE'RE IN A SORT OF A LOW
TRUST ENVIRONMENT BECAUSE WE
ARE ALREADY SEEN AS A GROUP
OF PEOPLE WHO FAVOR ONE GROUP
OVER THE OTHER.
SO WE CONSTANTLY GET THIS SORT
OF COMPARISON THAT WE'RE
RUINING THE CITY AND YOU KNOW
FOR INSTANCE SEVEN TWENTY ONE
FOREST WHICH IS A DEVELOPMENT
THAT IS ALMOST NEARING
COMPLETION.
IT'S A TWELVE TIME INCREASE ON
ITS PROPERTY TAXES.
IT INCREASES THE NUMBER
OF HOUSING UNITS THERE BY I
THINK FACTOR FOUR AND WE YOU
KNOW, WE ARE TOLD THAT THAT WAS
A GIVEAWAY BUT THAT SAME
DEVELOPER PAID FOUR POINT SEVEN
MILLION DOLLARS INTO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND AND
THAT TAX REVENUE IS GOING TO
PERMIT THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TO KEEP THE MILITARY LOW OVER
TIME.
SO WE'RE NOT CONSTANTLY HAVING
TO INCREASE THAT AND I FEEL
LIKE THIS IS A SYMBIOTIC KIND
OF RELATIONSHIP BUT WE ARE
PITTED OFTEN AS FAVORING ONE
GROUP OVER THE OTHER AND I I
JUST DON'T KNOW WHO WHOSE JOB
IT IS WITHIN THE CITY.
I JUST KNOW IT'S NOT OURS AND
IF IT IS, WE'RE DOING A REALLY
POOR JOB OF CONVINCING OUR
NEIGHBORS TO BE UP HERE AND
JUST SAY THAT LIKE WE WANT TO
GET ALL THIS DEVELOPMENT SO WE
CAN GET MORE TAXES.
I MEAN WHAT A TERRIBLE
NARRATIVE THAT IS, RIGHT?
I MEAN HIGHER DENSITY
DEVELOPMENT THEY PAY MORE IN
TAXES.
THAT IS A GREAT WAY IN LAND
CONSTRAINED CITY TO, YOU KNOW,
INCREASE OUR YOU KNOW, WHAT WE
TAKE IN.
UM, I THINK THAT YOU JUST NEED
A COUPLE THAT WITH WHERE THE
TAX MONEY IS GOING AND THE FACT
THAT LIKE WE TALK ABOUT LIKE
DESIGN CONTROLS AND OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS AND MAKING
SURE THAT DEVELOPMENT, YOU
KNOW, MAKES THE CITY BETTER AND
MORE ATTRACTIVE AND THEY AREN'T
JUST DOING LIKE FIVE OVER ONES
WITH PLAIN FACE, YOU KNOW, I
MEAN LIKE YOU KNOW, PEOPLE MAY
LIVE IN THOSE DOES THAT ADD TO
QUALITY OF LIFE, QUALITY
OF PLACE, HUMANITY?
>> I DEBATABLE UM I MEAN VERSUS
THE PEOPLE THAT ARE SLEEPING ON
THE FLOOR OF MY CHURCH I WOULD
SAY YES, THAT IS AN IMPROVEMENT
OF THEIR QUALITY OF LIFE THEN
JUST THIS WINTER WE HAD A WEEK
WHERE WE HAD TWENTY FIVE MEN
THAT LIVED IN OUR HOUSE ON THE
FLOOR IN OUR CHURCH AND WE
JOINED TWELVE OTHER CHURCHES SO
JUST ANOTHER CONTRIBUTING VOICE
INTO HOW WE IMPROVE THE QUALITY
OF THOSE FOLKS LIVES RIGHT ON
AND YOU WILL IMPROVE THE PLANS
THAT COME BEFORE THE CITY THAT
IS, YOU KNOW YOUR JOB.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT YOU
ALL WEIGH IN ON I SUPPOSE MY MY
MY POINT IS THAT A HIGHER
DENSITY DEVELOPMENT DOES IF IT
DOES ANYTHING ELSE INCREASES
THE TAX BASE.
THERE'S A WAY TO DO THAT.
I THINK THE COMMUNITY, YOU
KNOW, TALKED ABOUT QUITE A BIT
THERE'S PROBABLY A WAY NOT TO
DO IT IN TALKING ABOUT LIKE YOU
INCENTIVIZING DEVELOPMENT, THE
ONE THING THAT WE WANT TO AVOID
AT ALL COSTS IS PUTTING MONEY
TOWARDS A PROJECT THAT DOESN'T
NEED IT ANYTHING THAT WILL COME
BEFORE US I MEAN WE WOULD
THOROUGHLY, THOROUGHLY VET TO
MAKE SURE THAT THERE WAS LIKE A
BUT FOR CASE MADE BUT FOR THE
INCENTIVE A PROJECT WOULD NOT
HAPPEN.
IT DOESN'T NEED DOESN'T NEED IT
DON'T DON'T GIVE IT OUT LIKE
BUT DON'T EVER DO THAT THAT IS
LIKE KIND OF RULE NUMBER ONE
HERE BUT A LOT OF A LOT
OF TIMES DESIRABLE PROJECTS
ESPECIALLY YOU KNOW HIGH
QUALITY, EXTREMELY SUSTAINABLE
PROJECTS THAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR
HERE DON'T PENCIL OUT.
WE STILL MAY WANT THEM.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING SOMETHING
TO CONSIDER.
I THINK MY LAST QUESTION FOR
YOU IS THIS PROCESS THE
PLANNING PROCESS WHICH
CONTRIBUTES TO I THINK
POTENTIALLY SOME OF THE SOFT
COST BECAUSE WE ARE IN THE
PROCESS OF DEVELOPMENT WHAT
WHAT THOUGHTS, FEEDBACK,
SUGGESTIONS DO YOU HAVE FOR US
FOR IMPROVING THIS?
WE'VE READ FORMER DEPUTY
ADMINISTRATOR FOURNIER'S PLAN
THAT HAD SOME PIECES WE'VE
TAKEN SOME ACTION ON THAT
ESPECIALLY ON DEVELOPMENTS
WHERE PUBLIC COMMENT DOESN'T
CHANGE THE OUTCOME OF THE
DEVELOPMENT.
SO WE'VE SORT OF STARTED THE
PROCESS OF ADJUSTING THAT.
BUT ARE THERE OTHER THINGS FROM
YOUR EXPERIENCE THAT YOU WOULD
LIKE TO SAY TO SINCE YOU'RE
HERE?
OH WOW.
FIRST OF ALL, BRAD'S TEAM HAS
JUST DONE A TREMENDOUS JOB LIKE
STARTING TO IMPLEMENT SOME
OF THOSE THINGS AND I KNOW THAT
THEY ARE WORKING ON SOME
PROCESS IMPROVEMENTS LIKE AS AS
WE SPEAK WHICH IS PRETTY COOL.
UM, ONE OF THE OTHER THINGS IN
THAT REPORT WHICH HAVING DONE
THIS IN TWO OTHER COMMUNITIES,
ONE QUITE A BIT LARGER AND A
LITTLE BIT LARGER IS THAT THE
THE THE AMOUNT OF MATERIALS YOU
ALL NEED FOR A SITE PLAN TO GO
THROUGH IS SO MUCH HIGHER THAN
OTHER COMMUNITIES.
I MEAN YOU NEED BULBA LIKE THIS
LITTLE SET OF PLANS THERE IS
THERE IS A REAL COST AND A REAL
RISK TO SOMEBODY PUTTING ALL
THAT TOGETHER BEFORE THEY EVEN
KNOW IF THEY CAN DO THE PROJECT
OR NOT THAT THAT IS THAT IS NOT
TYPICAL.
UM, SO IT'S IS A VERY FRONT
LOADED PROCESS I WOULD SAY
SHORTENING FRONT END AND
PUTTING THAT ON THE BACK END
WHEN THEY'RE JUST WORKING FOR
TECHNICAL COMPLIANCE IS
SOMETHING THAT YOU ALL SHOULD
DEFINITELY LOOK AT.
I DON'T THAT'S A SURPRISE TO
BRAD AT ALL.
BUT IT IS SOMETHING THAT LIKE I
HAVE OBSERVED THAT I HAD HEARD
AND READ IN THAT REPORT BEFORE
I CAME HERE BUT THEN SEEING IN
ACTION IS IT SLOWS DOWN
PROJECTS AND IT HAS A LOT
OF RISK AND HEARTBURN TO
DEVELOPERS.
I HEAR FROM A LOT OF MY FORMER
DEVELOPER DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
LIKE OH YOU WENT TO INTERVIEW
HER.
THAT'S A TOUGH NUT TO CRACK
LIKE OH YEAH.
WELL
TRIUS TRY AS SOON IT'LL BE
BETTER BUT THERE'S A REPUTATION
FOR THE WAY THAT IT IS HERE AND
I THINK THAT'S A BIG PART
OF IT.
THANK YOU.
OTHER COMMISSIONERS COMMISSION
REPORT AND I THINK SO YOU'RE
ONLY HERE FOR TWO MONTHS I'M
SURE YOUR PLATE IS ALREADY FULL
BUT I KIND OF WANT TO SECOND
THE MOTION THAT MAYBE THINK
ABOUT ADDING TO YOUR PORTFOLIO
PROVIDING TO CITIZENS OF THIS
COMMUNITY SOME BETTER
EXPLANATION ABOUT THE
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE
PROCESSES WE REQUIRE AND THEN
IN POSITIONS WE PUT IN PLACE.
BUT THE BENEFITS THAT WE'RE
GETTING OUT OF IT AND WHO'S
PAYING FOR THE TAXES AND WHO IT
IS A BIT OF A BLACK BOX.
WE KNOW WE'RE PAYING A WHOLE
LOT OF TAXES TO LIVE HERE.
I PAY A LOT OF TAXES TO LIVE
HERE.
WHERE'S ALL THAT MONEY GOING?
HOW IS IT BEING ALLOCATED?
HOW IS IT HELPING CREATE THE
KIND OF COMMUNITY THAT'S BECOME
SUCH A GREAT PLACE THAT MORE
PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE HERE THAN
WE CAN ACCOMMODATE PROVIDING
KIND OF EDUCATIONAL SERVICE I
THINK WOULD BE A GREAT
CONTRIBUTION.
>> I THINK THAT THAT'S A BIG,
BIG QUESTION.
IT DOES EXTEND PROBABLY BEYOND
THIS OFFICE.
BUT I THINK TALKING ABOUT HOW
THAT RELATES TO ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT, I MEAN THAT'S LIKE
HOW OUR TAX MONEY COMES IN AND
HOW IT'S USED IS VICTORIES THAT
WE'VE DONE.
SOME WAYS IT IS, YOU KNOW,
GOING IS TOTALLY IT TOTALLY
APPROPRIATE AND BE SOMETHING
I'D BE HAPPY TO TO AS MUCH
EDUCATION AS YOU CAN WOULD BE
HELPFUL.
>> YEAH.
YEAH.
I THINK A LOT OF THAT IS A
COMMUNICATION ISSUE AS MUCH AS
ANYTHING I WORKED IN THE CITY I
OPENED UP WATCHING THIS LIKE WE
WOULD CELEBRATE WE WOULD
CELEBRATE EVERYTHING.
I MEAN WE WOULD CELEBRATE A
SIDEWALK GETTING REPAVED.
I MEAN I USED TO I USED TO
SCRATCH MY HEAD ABOUT IT BUT
PEOPLE UNDERSTOOD THAT IT
HAPPENED AND UNDERSTOOD THAT
THAT WAS THE CITY GETTING STUFF
DONE.
>> UM AND SO JUST YEAH.
BEING A LITTLE MORE
COMMUNICATIVE ABOUT WHERE TAX
MONEY GOES AND SO THAT'S A
GREAT THING AND THAT'S THAT'S
GREAT.
I MEAN THIS I WILL SAY THE
AMOUNT OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
THAT I HAVE EXPERIENCED AND
SEEN HERE PALES IN COMPARISON
TO WHAT I HAVE SEEN ANYWHERE
ELSE REALLY.
I MEAN THE LEVEL
OF CONVERSATION AMAZING.
ADMIRABLE AND WHAT I'M WHEN I'M
THINKING ABOUT THIS, YOU KNOW,
JUST OUT AND ABOUT IT SEEMS
LIKE PEOPLE ARE EXTREMELY WELL
EDUCATED.
>> BUT I SEE YOUR POINT LIKE
JUST COMMUNICATING OUT BETTER
LIKE WHAT EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE
DOING.
I THINK THAT'S GREAT.
>> I THINK I CAN TAKE THAT JUST
TO THE QUESTION KEEP THAT IN
MIND WHEN WE MOVE TO THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX EVEN
THOUGH THAT COMPREHENSIVELY
MIGHT NOT BE ADDRESSED TO THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICE,
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT MIGHT BE
ARTICULATED AS A GOAL OR
ASPIRATION FOR US AS A CITY TO
FIND THE RIGHT WAY TO
COMPREHENSIVELY ADDRESS THAT.
>> WELL, THANK YOU, MR. GIANT.
THANKS FOR YOUR PRESENTATION
AND THE CONVERSATION AND
WELCOME.
THANK YOU.
GLAD TO HAVE YOU.
ALL RIGHT, FRIENDS, I NEED A
BREAK.
SO LET'S TAKE A SIX MINUTE
BATHROOM BREAK.
WE'LL RETURN AT EIGHT TWENTY
SEVEN
TO ORDER THOSE IN THE
CHAMBER IF YOU WANT TO MOVE
YOUR CONVERSATION.
OTHERWISE WE ARE GOING TO GET
STARTED.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE ARE NOW I THINK ARE STILL
WHERE WE WERE RIGHT.
WE ARE IN TEN TO A THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
PRESENTATIONS AND NOW WE'RE
ONTO THE IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
BY SENIOR PLANNER BENNETT WHO
PREFERS TO BE CALLED MICHELLE.
MICHELLE, CAN YOU TAKE IT AWAY?
>> YES.
GOOD EVENING, COMMISSIONERS'.
I WANT TO MAKE A FEW POINTS
BEFORE WE GET INTO THIS ONE.
THIS IS MEANT TO BE CHAPTER SIX
OF THE DRAFT.
IF YOU RECALL WE HAD ORIGINALLY
PLANNED TO DO THIS IN THAT
APRIL MAY SCHEDULE.
BUT AS THINGS CHANGED WE HAD TO
PUSH THAT BACK A LITTLE BIT.
>> SO HERE WE ARE THIS EVENING
STARTING TO LOOK AT THE DRAFT
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX.
>> UM, THE IDEA IS THAT THEY
ARE MORE ACTIONS THAT WE CAN
TAKE TO FULFILL OUR GOALS THIS
IS KIND OF LIKE WHAT WOULD BE
MY CHECKLIST OF THINGS TO
ACCOMPLISH WITH THE PLANNING
TEAM OVER THE NEXT TWENTY FIVE
YEARS IN TERMS OF THE GOALS
THAT ARE HERE?
THIS IS FROM THE ORIGINAL SET
OF GOALS BEFORE WE DID OUR
EDITS.
SO JUST KNOW THAT SOME THINGS
MIGHT NOT MATCH PERFECTLY AND
WELL WE CAN ADDRESS THAT WHEN
WE GET TO THAT.
>> AND THEN THIRDLY I DO WANT
TO ADDRESS COMMISSIONER
SCHMIDT'S COMMENT ABOUT THE
FRUSTRATION THAT IT'S NOT
SPECIFIC ENOUGH.
I HEAR YOU ESPECIALLY AS
SOMEONE WHO HAS TO IMPLEMENT
THIS BUT I JUST WANT YOU ALL TO
REMEMBER WE AGAIN THIS IS AN
EXERCISE OF STRIKING THE RIGHT
BALANCE.
THIS IS A TWENTY FIVE YEAR PLAN
AND WE CAN LIST AS MR. GIANT
SAID, SPECIFIC TOOLS BUT THAT
THEY MIGHT CHANGE OUR CURRENT
ADMINISTRATION IS CURRENTLY
CUTTING TOOLS THAT WE'VE USED
BEFORE.
THE STATE IS CONSTANTLY
CHANGING THEM SO THE LANGUAGE
IS STILL VAGUE SO THAT WE HAVE
DIRECTION BUT THAT IF WE ARE IN
A SPECIFIC SITUATION WE CAN
FIGURE OUT WHAT IS BEST FOR
SPECIFIC PROJECTS SO I'D JUST
ADD THAT AT THE FRONT END
BECAUSE I FEEL SIMILARLY
SOMETIMES BUT REMEMBERING THE
KIND OF SCOPE THAT WE HAVE
HERE, I DON'T KNOW IN SOME
INSTANCES HOW MUCH MORE
SPECIFIC WE CAN WOULD THAT I
WILL ASK YOU HOW YOU'D LIKE TO
HANDLE TONIGHT.
I KNOW YOU JUST RECEIVED THIS A
FEW DAYS AGO.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT DOCUMENT WE
CAN START THIS EVENING OR IF
YOU WANT MORE TIME AND TO SEND
ME IN COMMENTS THE WAY WE'VE
DONE BEFORE I CAN ORGANIZE IT
THAT WAY WE CAN FOCUS OUR
CONVERSATION FOR NEXT TIME.
HOW ARE YOU ALL FEELING WITH
HOW YOU WANT TO APPROACH THIS
THIS EVENING?
>> THIS IS I'M SORRY CAN I
COMMISSIONER HAMMER THANK YOU.
SORRY YOU WERE BUSY.
THIS IS NOT GOING TO ANSWER
THAT QUESTION.
I'M SORRY SO HOW DO YOU SEE
THINGS IN HERE CHANGING BY THE
CONSULTOR BASED ON THE NEW
DRAFT?
ARE THEY GOING TO NEED TO COME
BACK AND MAKE ADJUSTMENTS?
>> I THINK SO BECAUSE SOME
GOALS HAVE BEEN MOVED, SOME
GOALS WILL BE COMBINED AND SO
THAT'S WHY WE'VE HAD A HARD
TIME WHERE TO FIT THIS IN IN
THIS PROCESS I THINK WE COULD
STILL MAKE A FIRST PASS BECAUSE
I THINK LARGELY THINGS ARE
SIMILAR BUT THIS MIGHT BE
FOLLOWING KIND OF LIKE TRAILING
THE EFFORTS WE'RE MAKING TO THE
DRAFT.
RIGHT.
AND THEN THEY CAN MAKE THAT
IT'S TO THIS.
>> SO I GUESS WHAT I WOULD SAY
THEN IS WITH THIS VERSION I
DON'T WANT TO I I PERSONALLY
DON'T WANT TO LIKE LINE AT IT.
>> SURE.
MAYBE IT'S JUST LIKE BIGGER IF
WE WHATEVER WE DECIDE TO DO
TONIGHT IF WE DECIDE TO DO
SOMETHING TONIGHT MAYBE IT'S
JUST BROADER BIGGER PICTURE
COMMENTS RATHER THAN LIKE THIS
WORD DOESN'T LIKE I WROTE DOWN
THE AWKWARD SENTENCE LIKE THAT
KIND OF STUFF WE DON'T NEED TO
COVER .
>> I WOULD AGREE WITH THAT
COMMISSIONER OR THE FOLLOWING
QUESTION.
SO THE GOALS ARE FROM I DIDN'T
DO A COMPARISON BUT ALL OF THE
ITEMS UNDER THE GOALS ARE ALSO
FROM THE ORIGINAL DRAFT.
>> ARE THEY?
THEY WERE NEVER IN THE DRAFT SO
THE GOALS ARE IN THE DRAFT.
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE NO ONE AND
THEN THE STRATEGIES ONE POINT
ONE ONE POINT TWO ONE POINT
THREE ONE FOUR THOSE ARE ALL IN
THE PLAN.
THOSE ARE THE STRATEGIES BUT
THEY JUST HAVE LIKE A PARAGRAPH
UNDERNEATH THEM DESCRIBING THEM
AND THEN THESE KIND OF THE
LIGHTER GRAY TEXT BELOW IT.
>> THAT'S WHAT'S NEW.
SO YOU EXTRACTED THEM FROM THE
TEXT OR WHO WHO CREATED THESE
ACTION ITEMS WERE OUR
CONSULTANTS AND US BASED ON THE
GOALS AND STRATEGIES AND HOW
MUCH ARE THEY LIKELY TO CHANGE?
I GUESS I'M KIND OF ONE WITH DO
WE EVEN NEED TO DO THIS OR
WOULD IT BE BETTER TO DO THIS
AFTER WE GET THE NEXT DRAFT AND
THIS IS IT GOING TO CHANGE SO
MUCH THAT I MEAN HONESTLY I
DON'T WANT TO SPEND A LOT
OF TIME REWORKING A DOCUMENT
THAT'S PROBABLY GOING TO CHANGE
DRAMATICALLY AFTER A PLANE GETS
REVISED.
>> IS THAT FAIR?
I MEAN THAT'S UP FOR YOU ALL TO
DECIDE.
I THINK LIKE PEOPLE WANT LIKE
HOUSING IN NEIGHBORHOODS I
DON'T THINK CHANGED
SUBSTANTIALLY.
I THINK ECONOMY AND OPPORTUNITY
DID AND I DON'T INFRASTRUCTURE
AND SERVICES CHANGED
DRAMATICALLY BUT RIGHT.
>> BUT YEAH, I TAKE YOUR POINT
EITHER WAY LIKE WE COULD START
LOOKING AT OVER AT A HIGH LEVEL
TONIGHT WE ARE MEETING WITH
THEM TOMORROW SO THAT COULD BE
HELPFUL TO RELAY THINGS TO THEM
.
BUT IF YOU WANTED TO SPEND MORE
TIME LOOKING AT THIS AND
WAITING TILL YOU GOT THE SECOND
DRAFT, I SUPPOSE THAT COULD BE
AN OPTION AS WELL.
>> MAYBE JUST MAKE YOUR JULY
MEETINGS FULLER COMMISSIONER
ADAM, THIS IS A LITTLE BIT
OF AN OUTSIDE THE BOX QUESTION
SUGGESTION BUT DOES THE
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN HAVE TO BE
APPROVED AS PART OF A PLAN
MEANING COULD YOU DO WE NEED TO
TACKLE THIS?
>> IT'S A LITTLE BIT AWKWARD TO
TALK ABOUT IMPLEMENTING ACTION
AND STRATEGIES AROUND THAT
BEFORE THE DOCUMENTS LOCKED IN
WHICH WON'T BE LIKE IT WILL BE
MOSTLY BAKED IN JULY OR AUGUST
BUT EVEN THEN THERE'S THE
POSSIBILITY THAT IT'S NOT AND I
GUESS I'M HAPPY TO REVISE IT.
BUT IF LEGALLY SPEAKING THE
PLAN EXISTS SEPARATELY FROM
LIKE A LIST OF IMPLEMENTATION
STRATEGIES THEN DOES IT MAKE
SENSE TO TO SEPARATE THE TWO
AND TACKLE THEM KALWARIA TIME
SO I WOULD HAVE TO CONSULT WITH
THE MICHIGAN PLANNING ENABLING
ACT MY JUST WHAT I REMEMBER
FROM IT IS THE THING THAT HAS
TO BE INCLUDED IS LIKE A ZONING
PLAN IN A FUTURE LAND USE MAP.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF IT
SPECIFICALLY SAYS THAT YOU HAVE
TO ADOPT A SET OF ACTIONS BUT I
WOULD HAVE TO I WOULD HAVE TO
CONFIRM THAT AND WE DO HAVE AN
EXPERT HERE, DON'T WE
COMMISSIONER NORTON?
MY RESPONSE IS ABSOLUTELY YES.
OK, CAN YOU TALK TO YOUR MIKE
PLEASE?
YES, ABSOLUTELY.
>> YES, BECAUSE YOU REALLY IF
ANYTHING I'M CONCERNED THAT WE
HAVE A PLAN THAT'S GENERAL
ENOUGH TO ALLOW FOR CHANGES
OVER TIME IN AND FROM
CONDITIONS.
BUT PEOPLE WANT TO KNOW WHAT'S
GOING TO COME OUT OF THIS PLAN
AND WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN AND
TO SOME EXTENT WE HAVE TO
CLARIFY WHAT EXACTLY ARE THE
ACTIONS THAT ARE GOING TO COME
FROM IT AND WHO'S GOING TO BE
RESPONSIBLE AND GOOD PLANNING
PRACTICE UP AND DOWN CALLS FOR
MAKING SURE THAT A PLAN
INCLUDES IMPLEMENTATION AND
STRATEGIES AND ASSIGNS
RESPONSIBILITIES SO PERSPECTIVE
IT AND SAY WE ABSOLUTELY SHOULD
I THINK INCLUDE THIS.
I'M JUST NOT WANTING TO SPEND A
LOT OF TIME FINE TUNING
SOMETHING THAT I THINK COULD
CHANGE A FAIR BIT BASED ON THE
FEEDBACK THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE
LOOKING AT ON THE NEXT DRAFT.
I WANT TO BE EFFICIENT WITH WE
DON'T WANT TO DO THOUGH IS THE
WAY THE PLAN BECAUSE WE'RE
WE'RE BACK LIKE PROBABLY FROM A
PORTERING PERSPECTIVE THIS
FEELS OUT OF SEQUENCE AND WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THE FACT THAT
IT'S OUT OF SEQUENCE WITH THE
DOCUMENT.
WE HAVE A DOCUMENT THAT'S IN
FLUX AND THEN AN IMPLEMENTATION
DOCUMENT THAT FLOWS FROM THE
DOCUMENT THAT'S IN FLUX THAT WE
DON'T HAVE IN FRONT OF US AND
I'M WORRIED WE'RE GOING TO GET
THAT DOCUMENT BACK AND THEN
WORK ON THIS AND IT'S GOING TO
CREATE A TANGLED PROBLEM FOR US
IN JULY OR AUGUST AND IT
LEGALLY I DON'T HAVE TO DO IT
RIGHT NOW.
I MEAN I'VE SEEN YOUR POINT
ABOUT SHOULD DO IT WANT TO DO
IT.
BUT IF I CAN DO IT IN DECEMBER
INSTEAD OF NOW, I I'D LIKE TO
AT LEAST TALK ABOUT WHETHER
THAT MAKES SENSE.
BUT FOLKS MAY DISAGREE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS, I'M I
DEFINITELY
THEY NEED TO GO HAND
IN HAND BECAUSE I THINK EVEN
THOUGH THEY ARE VAGUE WHAT I
LIKE IS THAT THEY ARE SO MUCH
MORE SUCCINCT THAN READING THE
WHOLE THING AND SO PEOPLE HAVE
A MUCH BETTER SENSE OF WHAT
THIS THIS PLAN IS ACTUALLY
GOING TO MEAN FOR THEM.
AND SO I FEEL LIKE THIS IS
SUPER IMPORTANT LIKE TO GET
DONE AS A COMMUNICATION
DOCUMENT NOW.
>> BUT I'M ALSO WITH YOU THAT
LIKE I'M WORRIED ABOUT TIMING.
YEAH, WE CAN VISIT IT IF WE RUN
TO A TIME CRUNCH I DON'T KNOW
BUT I MEAN FROM MY PERSPECTIVE
I HEAR THE TIMING PART THIS IN
SOME WAYS IN MY MIND IF THIS IS
OUR ACTION ITEMS, THIS IS THE
THING THAT REALLY NEEDS TO BE
RIGHT.
>> BUT IT IS IT'S OUTDATED NOW
ALREADY AND FOR SOME OF THEM
BUT I DO THINK THAT WE SHOULD
TALK ABOUT ONE TO LIKE ONE THE
FIRST SECTION STUFF AND TOWARDS
THE END SECTION STUFF.
ALL RIGHT.
COMMISSIONER NORDON.
OH, I DON'T KNOW THAT THE
TIMING NEEDS TO BE A PROBLEM
BECAUSE THESE IMPLEMENTATION
ACTION ITEMS SHOULD FLOW FROM
THE PLAN AND THEY SHOULD LOOK
PRETTY CLEARLY AND IT'S A
LITTLE BIT HARD TO COME BACK
AND LOOK AT THESE BECAUSE THEY
WERE COMPILED SO LATE AFTER
WE'VE SPENT SO MUCH TIME ON THE
PLAN.
SO WHAT WOULD BE NICE IS WITH
THE NEXT DRAFT THAT THEY
IMPLEMENTED, ACTION PLAN IS
PREPARED WITH IT SO THAT AS
WE'RE REVIEWING THE PLAN THEN
WE CAN LOOK YOU KNOW, IN
CHAPTER ONE THEN WE CAN LOOK AT
THE CHAPTER ONE IMPLEMENTATION
ITEM AS WE'RE IN REAL TIME AND
THEN I THINK THEY'LL MESH
TOGETHER MUCH MORE NICELY AND
IT'LL MAKE MORE SENSE.
I THINK THAT'S GOING TO BE A
MORE EFFICIENT USE OF MY TIME
TO MAKE THAT CHECK WHEN WE'VE
GOT THE NEXT DRAFT.
YOU CAN SEE HERE'S WHAT THE
PLAN IS CALLING FOR AND HERE
ARE THE ACTION ITEMS THAT GO
WITH IT.
>> DO THEY MAKE SENSE BUT CAN
MAKE MAKING SURE THE CONSULTANT
GIVES US THIS UPDATED VERSION
OF THIS WHEN WE GET THE NEXT
DRAFT PLAN?
>> DON'T LOOK AT IS THAT
POSSIBLE?
>> I GUESS I THINK SO.
>> IF YOU MEAN IS THAT POSSIBLE
WITHIN OUR TIME FRAME?
YES.
FOR YOUR CONSULTANT TO PRODUCE
NEXT YEAR?
>> I THINK SO.
I AS MY ONLY REQUEST OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION WOULD BE
LIKE YOU REMEMBER HOW LONG OUR
MEETINGS WERE AND HOW STRESSFUL
THEY ARE.
MAYBE JUST THAT THAT'S NOT THE
FIRST TIME THAT YOU'VE EVER
LOOKED AT THEM AND SO THESE
MIGHT CHANGE BUT THESE ARE A
REALLY GOOD INDICATION OF WHAT
THEY MIGHT BE OR WHAT THEY'RE
GOING TO CHANGE FROM.
SO I WOULD SAY IN THE NEXT WEEK
WE HAVE A WORKING SESSION NEXT
WEEK AS WELL LIKE YOU HAVE IF
YOU HAVE SOME TIME MAYBE SEE
WHAT ARE LARGER SCALE EDITS OR
THINGS LIKE I GUESS JUST COME
PREPARED AND COME IN MIND WITH
WHAT WHAT EXISTS HERE.
I MEAN I HAVE SOME TONIGHT IF
IF WE WANT TO PERMIT IT BUT
LET'S HEAR FROM COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBEE.
>> YEAH.
SO WOULD YOU LIKE US TO SEND IN
COMMENTS IF WE GO THAT
DIRECTION LIKE UM I WAS A
LITTLE WHEN WE SENT IN THE
COMMENTS BEFORE WE ENDED UP
JUST TALKING ABOUT THE COMMENTS
HE SENT IN WHICH IS FINE BUT
LIKE IS THIS A WE NEED TO SEND
IN COMMENTS IF WE WANT THEM TO
BE CONSIDERED KIND OF THING OR
IS IT A IF YOU HAVE TIME TO DO
COMMENTS LIKE WELL DID YOU FIND
THAT HELPFUL?
WE DO HAVE LIKE A RUNNING LOG
NOW OF EVERYTHING THAT'S BEEN
MUCH EASIER FOR US TO MANAGE.
SO IN TERMS OF RECORD KEEPING,
I THINK IT'S HELPFUL.
UM, WE COULD MAYBE FORMAT IT
DIFFERENTLY WHEN WE'RE PUBLICLY
EDITING AGAIN BUT I WOULDN'T I
I WOULD SUPPORT SENDING
COMMENTS IN PRIOR IF YEAH.
I THINK THAT WAS THE PLAN TO
WRITE THAT WE WERE GOING TO GET
THE DRAFT BACK, SPEND A WEEK
SEND IN THE COMMENTS AND I'M
SORRY BUT I'M WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT FOR NEXT WEEK RIGHT.
>> YEAH.
SO WELL THAT DEPENDS VIEW IF
YOU ALL WANT TO WAIT UNTIL THE
SECOND DRAFT THAT'S GOING TO
KNOCK TO YOU UNTIL THE 24TH.
>> YEAH THAT'S WHEN WE'LL BE
DISCUSSING IT.
WE HOPE TO GET IT TO YOU BEFORE
THEN YOU WILL HAVE TIME BEFORE
THE TWENTY FOUR TO HAVE THE NEW
DRAFT WITH THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX AND THEN YOU COULD SEND
IN THE COMMENTS BETWEEN THE
SEVEN I'D HAVE TO LOOK AT THE
TENTH YEAH.
>> AND THE TWENTY FOURTH AND
YES PART OF THE REASON FOR THAT
IS WE HAVE OUR S SEVENTEEN
WHICH IS OUR NEXT REGULAR
MEETING AND WE DIDN'T WANT TO
HAVE THE SECOND REVISION OF THE
PLAN ON THAT MEETING BECAUSE IT
WOULD JUST MAKE THAT MEETING
NEVER END.
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS SO AS A
POINT OF CLARIFICATION NEXT
WEEK THE 10TH IS WHEN WE ARE
SUPPOSED TO GET THE DRAFT
OF THE THE REVISED DRAFT.
YES.
DOES THAT REVISE DRAFT AT LEAST
REORDER THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX AND MATCH WITH WHAT THE
NEW TEXT IS FROM THE NEW DRAFT
?
IT SHOULD WRITE BECAUSE IT'S
LIKE BOTH WILL HAVE BEEN
REMOVED RIGHT THEN THE THE NEW
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX WOULD
REFLECT WHAT'S IN THE DRAFT SO
WE CAN TELL THEM WHEN THEY GET
IT TO IN THE TENT TO HAVE THE
THE UPDATED DRAFT UPDATED
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX THAT
REFLECTS THAT DRAFT PERFECT.
>> AND THEY WERE GOING TO DO
THAT ANYWAY LIKE THEY'RE MAKING
EDITS BECAUSE IT'S DUE IN A
WEEK.
RIGHT.
AND SO ANYTHING THAT WE
DISCUSSED TONIGHT OR THAT WE
WOULD SEND COMMENTS ON LIKE MAY
NOT BE I MEAN TONIGHT MAYBE BUT
IF WE SEND COMMENTS TO YOU BY
THE END OF THIS WEEK, THAT'S
NOT GOING TO MAKE IT INTO THE
UPDATE DRAFT THAT WE SEE, IS IT
RIGHT?
>> YEAH, I THINK WE CAN STICK
TO THE I BELIEVE IT IS IF WE
GIVE IT TO YOU ON THE 10TH THEN
YOU HAVE ALL YOUR COMMENTS TO
SPARE THE SEVENTEEN SO THAT I
CAN ORGANIZE THEM FOR THE
TWENTY FOURTH IF YOU ALL AGREE
TO THAT SCHEDULE I THINK WE CAN
DO THAT GREAT EVERYONE OK WITH
THAT.
>> YEAH FOR SURE.
I DO HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHAT'S IN FRONT OF US TONIGHT
SO I DO WANT TO ASK THOSE
BEFORE WE'RE DONE BUT LET'S
HEAR FROM COMMISSIONER NORTON.
YEAH YOU JUST SAID THIS TO ME I
DO HAVE SOME THOUGHTS.
I'M THINKING ABOUT WHAT WE JUST
HEARD ABOUT ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT AND THE FEEDBACK
FROM THAT FROM THE DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR THAT HE'S HEARING FROM
SO MANY DEVELOPERS ABOUT HOW
HARD IT IS TO DO DEVELOPMENT IN
ANN ARBOR.
UM, AND I GET THAT WE'RE REALLY
TRYING TO BALANCE WANTING TO
MAKE SURE THAT DEVELOPMENT
THAT'S COMING IN TO ANN ARBOR
IS HIGH QUALITY DEVELOPMENT
THAT FITS THE NEIGHBORHOODS AND
IS THE KIND OF STUFF WE WANT TO
SEE HAPPEN AND WE HAVE THE
LUXURY OF BEING ABLE TO DO THAT
BECAUSE DEVELOPERS WANT TO BE
HERE.
BUT THE MORE WE DO THAT, THE
MORE EXPENSIVE THE STRUCTURES
ARE THAT GET BUILT, THAT WHICH
CUTS AGAINST THE IDEA OF TRYING
TO ENCOURAGE MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
SO THERE'S A BALANCING ACT
THEY'RE HAVING SAID THAT I
CAN'T I'M LOOKING THROUGH THE
MATRIX I'M NOT SEEING AND I
HONESTLY DON'T RECALL FROM THE
PLAN ITSELF ANY DISCUSSION
ABOUT REVISITING THE
DEVELOPMENT AND REVIEW PROCESS
AND TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
FINE TUNE IT SO THAT IT'S
WORKING BETTER.
AND I KNOW THAT WE'VE DISCUSSED
THAT AND I KNOW THAT'S
SOMETHING YOU'RE DOING BUT I'M
NOT REMEMBERING WHERE IT IS IN
THE PLAN OR I'M NOT SEEING IT
IN HERE.
IT'S AT ONE POINT ONE AND
SPECIFICALLY AS IT RELATES TO
MULTIFAMILY TO STREAMLINE THE
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS TO
MORE EASILY DEVELOP MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING, TO SHORTEN THE REVIEW
TIME FRAME THAT THE ONE IS THAT
ENOUGH TO HAVE THAT ONE
STATEMENT I WAS GOING TO SAY SO
THE OTHER THING THAT YOU HAD
DIRECTED IS MORE INCORPORATION
OF THAT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
REPORT INTO THIS REPORT AND
THERE IS A LOT MORE SPECIFICITY
IN THAT REPORT AS WELL.
SO THAT WOULD BE ANOTHER PLACE
THAT WE COULD EITHER REFERENCE
THAT OR WE COULD REPLICATE THE
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THAT THE
GETS INTO SOME OF THE MORE
COMPLEX THINGS LIKE WE WERE
TALKING ABOUT THIS EVENING.
WHAT THE FINANCING MECHANISMS
FOR INFRASTRUCTURE ON A PROJECT
BASIS VERSUS HOLISTIC
COMMUNITY.
WHAT ARE THE REVIEW PROCESSES?
WHAT ARE YOU IT GETS
SPECIFICALLY WHAT DO WE REQUIRE
FOR SUBMITTAL AT THIS TABLE AND
WHAT COULD WE LIVE WITH NOW?
COULD WE LIVE WITHOUT
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT STUDY AND
FOR YOU TO APPROVE A SITE THAT
WITHOUT THE BENEFIT OF THAT
ANALYSIS OR WITHOUT THE BENEFIT
OF A DETAILED UTILITY ANALYSIS
LIKE YOU HEARD THAT GETS DONE
NOW THOSE ARE ALL QUESTIONS WE
COULD FIND THE BALANCE OF WE
WANT TO PROVIDE THAT AS AN
OPTION FOR DEVELOPMENT.
>> OK, SO MY REQUEST IS TO AS
YOU'RE WORKING THE PLAN TO TRY
AND TAKE A STAB AT FINDING YOU
KNOW AND I GET HOW MUCH DETAIL
WE PUT IN THIS PLAN AND HOW
MUCH DO WE LEAVE IT VAGUE
BECAUSE THERE WERE SOMETIMES
REASONS FOR THAT BUT I THINK WE
COULD DO MORE TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT TRADE OFF THAT WE'RE
TRYING TO GET.
AND WHAT I DON'T WANT TO DO IS
KIND OF DUMB DOWN.
WE'RE JUST GOING TO REMOVE OUR
CONSTRAINTS FROM DEVELOPMENT TO
MAKE EASIER TO BUILD AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
WELL, NO, THERE ARE REASONS WE
HAVE THOSE CONSTRAINTS IN PLACE
AT THE SAME TIME CLEARLY
THEY'RE OVERWHELMING SOME
THINGS AREN'T WORKING.
WE NEED TO FINE TUNE IT.
SO BRINGING IN SOME MORE
OF THAT NUANCE INTO THE PLAN
DISCUSSION I THINK WOULD BE A
REALLY GOOD THING AND MAKING
SURE IT GETS CAPTURED IN A
MEANINGFUL WAY AND MAYBE AT THE
END OF THE DAY THAT ONE
STATEMENT IS ENOUGH BUT AT
LEAST LET'S QUERY THAT AS WE
PROCEED.
>> THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE
?
>> I THINK JUST MY MY BIGGEST
THING WITH GETTING REALLY
SPECIFIC JUST KIND OF I THINK
TAXON TO THAT IS LIKE BASED ON
WHAT WE JUST HEARD ESPECIALLY
IF WE CAN ADD IN SOMETHING BOTH
TO THE PLAN AS A STRATEGY ABOUT
INCENTIVE AND STUFF AND THEN
HAD SOME MORE STUFF IN HERE
SINCE IT SOUNDS LIKE OUR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICE IS
AMENABLE TO THAT, I THINK IT
CAN BE BIG.
THAT'S FINE BUT I THINK THAT'LL
HELP STREAMLINE THE DEVELOPMENT
REVIEW PROCESS OR I CAN'T READ
THAT SO SMALL BUT I THINK IT'S
GOOD.
>> I DON'T THINK
IT SHOULD BE
JUST MULTIFAMILY.
>> I THINK LIKE DO WE WANT TO
THINK ABOUT THE STATE LIKE
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT THIS BEFORE.
IT'S LIKE INCENTIVES
OF PROJECTS ARE ADDING
SUSTAINABLE CITY ASPECTS INTO
IT WITHOUT US HAVING TO BEG.
SO I THINK THIS IS LIKE
STARTING TO GET BUT NOT ANYWAY
MORE INCENTIVIZED STUFF.
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS, I WILL
SKIP OVER THE LIKE SUPER
DETAILED ONES BUT JUST LIKE
BIGGER PICTURE THINGS, I THINK
THAT THERE'S ACTUALLY A WEIRD
MIX OF VERY SPECIFIC AND VERY
VAGUE AND SO THAT GIVES LIKE
FOR EXAMPLE, I FEEL LIKE A LOT
OF THE HOUSING STUFF IS PRETTY
VAGUE BUT THERE'S SOME SPECIFIC
THINGS FOR YEAH.
OR THE THE JUST CAUSE EVICTION
POLICY AT THE COUNTY THAT JUST
FELT VERY SPECIFIC COMPARED TO
THE LIKE COMPARED TO SOME
OF THE OTHER THINGS RATHER THAN
POLICIES TO BLOW UP.
>> RIGHT LIKE BROOKFIELD'S INTO
THE YEAH I I I GUESS PERSONALLY
I MET MORE GENERAL AND THE
REASON I'M THERE IS I WANT TO
DEFER WHENEVER POSSIBLE THE
BUDGET TO ALLEGES TO COUNCIL TO
SET SOME OF THESE GUYS WITH
RESPECT TO THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE.
A LOT OF WHAT HE'S TALKING
ABOUT TO ME FEEL LIKE A POLICY
JUDGMENTS THAT ARE NOT MINE TO
MAKE AND FEEL OUT OF SCOPE
OF THE WORK WE'VE BEEN DOING IN
TERMS OF SETTING A LAND USE
PLAN.
SO I'D I WOULD RATHER STAY MORE
GENERAL AND TO THE EXTENT WE
WANT TO BE CONSISTENT THEN WE
CAN BE MORE GENERAL THROUGHOUT
AND I GOT HUNG UP ON THE FOUR
BEDROOM THING AS WELL FOR
SPECIFICITY AND ALSO AGAIN FOR
POLICY JUDGMENT THAT DIDN'T
FLOW FROM SOME OF THE WORK
NATURALLY THAT WE'D IN DOING
SO.
YEAH, I THINK MORE GENERAL IS
KIND OF HOW I WANT TO TAKE IT.
>> I I GENERALLY AGREE I THINK
THAT SOME OF WHAT I WOULD LIKE
TO SEE IS TO WHAT END.
SO WHAT IS LIKE NOT JUST
REVISED A ZONING ORDINANCE.
>> RIGHT LIKE LIKE WHAT IS TO
DO WHAT LIKE AND SO THIS IS TO
TRY TO STRIKE THE BALANCE
BETWEEN X Y RIGHT OR TO TO I
THINK THAT THAT LIKE WHY IS IT
THAT WE'RE DOING IT WE DON'T
NEED TO GO INTO ALL OF THE
DETAILS BUT I FEEL LIKE THERE
MAY I MAYBE I'LL FIND A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF ONE.
YEAH GO FOR IT.
I'LL TRY THIS IF THIS IS A GOOD
EXAMPLE.
SO ONE IS LEVERAGE SOME OF THE
SHORT TERM RENTAL PERMIT FEES
TO DEVELOPMENT WAIVERS FOR LOW
AND MODERATE INCOME HOMEOWNERS
LIKE LIKE THE IDEA IS GOOD BUT
DO WE HAVE TO SPECIFY SHORT
TERM RENTAL FEES AND JUST SAY
KIND OF LEVERAGE FEES TO
DEVELOPMENT WAIVERS FOR LOW AND
MODERATE INCOME HOMEOWNERS OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
THE SHORT TERM RENTAL FEES
RENTAL PERMIT FEES MAY NOT BE
THE MECHANISM BUT THAT THERE
COULD BE A MECHANISM FOR
WAIVERS FOR I DON'T KNOW IF
THAT'S A YES AND IN PARTICULAR
WILL BE REMOVED BECAUSE I
REACHED OUT TO THAT OFFICE AND
WE CAN'T DO THAT NO, BUT I TAKE
YOUR POINT IN GREAT EXAMPLE OR
WHAT I MEAN YEAH, I WAS GOING
TO SAY THAT'S A THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT EXAMPLE THAT THERE'S
A LOT OF RESTRICTIONS ACTUALLY
ON BOTH UTILITIES AND PERMITS
THAT WE CAN'T WE CAN'T WE CAN'T
CHARGE YOU A PERMIT A HIGHER
FEE TO COVER THE COST TO SEND
INSPECTOR OUT TO SARAH'S
PROPERTY.
THERE IS A LOT OF RESTRICTIONS
.
WE CAN ONLY CHARGE WHAT IT
COSTS TO DO THE WORK ON YOUR
PROPERTY.
AND SO I THINK YOUR POINT IS
THE STRATEGY MIGHT BE TO FIND
WAYS TO REDUCE THE COSTS OF LOW
MODERATE PERMITS BUT IT MIGHT
NOT IT MIGHT IT MIGHT NOT BE
FROM A WAIVER.
IT MIGHT MEAN YOU WRITE THE
RIGHT RESOURCES FROM THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT TO PERMIT
YEARS TO ACCOMPLISH THAT AND
THOSE ARE THE KIND OF POLICIES
LIKE THE SHORT TERM RENTALS GO
OUT OF THE WINDOW AND NOBODY
DOES THEM ANYMORE.
WE DON'T WANT TO HAVE THAT
CODIFIED IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
LAND USE PLAN WHEN IT DOESN'T
EXIST.
BUT THE IDEA WOULD STILL BE
IMPORTANT.
>> YEAH.
CAN I ASK ANOTHER QUESTION OR
MAKE ANOTHER COMMENT IN
RELATION TO WHAT YOU BROUGHT UP
COMMISSIONER MILT'S IS THE WAY
THAT I'M READING THIS IS WHEN
YOU SAY TO WHAT END?
SO EVERYTHING UNDER ONE POINT
ONE I THINK TO WHAT END IS TO
ALLOW FOR MORE DENSITY AND ALL
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND
ENCOURAGE RIGHT.
>> YEAH.
SO ACTUALLY LIKE LET ME GIVE
YOU THE SPECIFIC EXAMPLE THAT
I'M GOING TO GO TO THE FOUR
BEDROOM THING WHICH I KNOW THAT
WE CAN DEBATE ON THAT BUT IT'S
INSTEAD LIKE DEFINE SOME
PRIVATE MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT
AS A SEPARATE LAND USE CLASS
AND I'M LIKE WHY I LIKE THAT IS
MINE TO IT.
MY SIMPLE COMMENT IS WHAT AND
LIKE I FEEL LIKE IT WAS NOT
CLEAR TO ME FROM THAT PART
OF THE TEXT ISN'T CHANGING IN
MY RECOLLECTION ALL THAT MUCH
AND IT WAS NOT CLEAR TO ME FROM
THE TEXT IN THE THING OR EVEN
TALKING ABOUT THIS FOR A LONG
TIME WHY THAT WOULD BE A
BENEFICIAL THING TO DO.
AND SO IT'S NOT READILY CLEAR
TO US WHY WE WOULD WANT TO DO
THAT WHERE THAT IDEA COMES
FROM.
YEAH, THAT'S WHAT I THAT'S WHAT
I MEAN.
>> LIKE THAT TO WHAT END
BECAUSE YEAH I MEAN THAT ONE IN
PARTICULAR I CAN SEE WHY THAT
STICKS OUT.
I THINK THOUGH THAT IS MEANT TO
ADDRESS A LOT OF THE COMMENTS
WE'VE GOT ABOUT HOW PROPERTIES
THAT ARE BUILT TO MAXIMIZE THE
NUMBER OF BEDROOMS ARE AS
VERSATILE FOR OTHER PEOPLE THAT
WANT TO USE THEM.
RIGHT.
SO THEY'RE GEARED TOWARD
STUDENTS AND ROOMMATES AND THEN
MAYBE MANY OF THIS IS FOR I'M
NOT SURE WHY IT DOESN'T SAY SIX
BUT LIKE A SIX BEDROOM HOUSE IS
NOT AS VERSATILE AND CAN'T BE
USED BY AS MANY PEOPLE OR FEWER
HOUSEHOLD TYPES WOULD WANT TO
USE THAT TO MARKET THING.
>> I WOULD SAY ANOTHER ANOTHER
WAY THAT I READ INTO THAT IS
WHEN WE'RE THINKING ABOUT WHEN
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT HOW TO
CODIFY THESE POLICIES.
FOR EXAMPLE, A LOT
OF COMMUNITIES PROVIDE A HIGHER
LEVEL OF DENSITY ADJACENT TO
CAMPUS AND OTHERWISE SIMILAR
DISTRICTS.
THAT MIGHT BE ANOTHER WAY THAT
YOU MIGHT WANT TO DESIGNATE A
GEOGRAPHY OR A TYPE OF HOUSING
WHERE YOU PROVIDE AN ADDITIONAL
LEVEL THAT MIGHT NOT BE AS
AVAILABLE IN ALL THINGS
EQUIVALENT ZONE ELSEWHERE IN
THE CITY BECAUSE OF ITS
PROXIMITY TO THE JOBS.
>> AND SO IN MY MIND THIS IS
WHERE I WOULD RATHER HAVE THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX SAY
CONSIDER WHETHER YOU WANT TO OR
LIKE THAT POTENTIAL BUT I WANT
TO PUSH BACK IN THAT PART
OF THIS IS US DECIDING WHAT
WHAT WHAT STRATEGY WE WANT TO
DO NOW COMING YEARS TO DO AND
FOR THE PLAN JUST AS THEY
CONSIDER WHETHER OR NOT YOU
WANT TO DO THIS IS KIND
OF TAKING AWAY THE GOAL OF THIS
PLAN TO SAY NO, THIS IS OUR
INTENTION AND WE INTEND OR
RESOURCE.
>> SO SHOULD COULD AINARO SORRY
SO SHOULD WE BECAUSE I WAS
SITTING AS I READ THROUGH THE
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN AND
ESPECIALLY THE FOUR BEDROOM
STUCK OUT TO ME OF COURSE AND I
WAS THINKING WHERE DID THIS
COME FROM?
SO ARE YOU SAYING YOU'RE
TELEGRAPHING WHAT YOU FEEL LIKE
YOU NEED RESOURCE SUPPORT FOR
AND NOW YOU'RE SOLICITING
FEEDBACK TO SAY IS THIS THE
DIRECTION THAT YOU WANT US TO
GO IN OR IS IT A DIFFERENT
DECISION LIKE BASED ON THE
FEEDBACK WE'VE HEARD?
HERE'S HOW WE ARE CODIFYING
THAT FEEDBACK.
SO I THINK I'M ASKING LIKE A OR
B SO ARE YOU CODIFYING FEEDBACK
THAT YOU'VE RECEIVED AND NOW
YOU'RE PRESENTING IT TO US TO
AFFIRM THAT IT'S CORRECT OR ARE
YOU TELEGRAPHING THIS IS WHAT
WE NEED FROM THE DOCUMENT IN
ORDER TO IMPLEMENT THESE
ASPECTS?
SO I'M JUST TRYING TO GET THE
LINE HOW MUCH OF IT IS FROM YOU
VERSUS FROM THE FEEDBACK WE'VE
RECEIVED?
I THINK IT'S SO WHAT IS IT LIKE
60 40?
>> SO I THINK THE I THINK THAT
WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
GENERALITY VERSUS SPECIFICITY
HERE AN OBSERVATION I WOULD I
WOULD HAVE AS WE'VE HEARD A LOT
OF CONVERSATION ABOUT LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL AND AND YOU'VE HAD
CONVERSATIONS HERE AT THIS
TABLE AND YOU'VE MADE DECISIONS
ABOUT WHAT THAT SHOULD BE AND
WHAT IT SHOULDN'T BE.
>> AND I THINK THAT THERE IS A
THIS THIS BODY CAN SAY WE
BELIEVE WHEREAS RESIDENTIAL
SHOULD BE THREE STORIES AND YOU
MIGHT SAY SOMETHING ALONG THE
LINES OF AND IT WOULD BE
APPROPRIATELY SCALED FOR THESE
AREAS.
OTHER PEOPLE MIGHT SAY THAT
HERE THAT KIND OF TERM
APPROPRIATELY SCALE AND THOSE
MIGHT BE VERY DIFFERENT THINGS.
AND SO I THINK I DON'T THINK
WE'RE GOING TO ANSWER ALL THOSE
CORE OF THESE QUESTIONS IN HERE
BUT I THINK WE COULD SAY WE'RE
GOING TO LOOK AT LOT SIZE
MINIMUMS.
WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT SET
BACKS LIKE THOSE THOSE MAKE
SENSE BUT IN SOMETHING AGAIN
SOMETHING LIKE THIS I THIS
COULD BE A WAY TO ADDRESS THAT
WHEN THERE IS DISTINCT
GEOGRAPHIC PRESSURE PRESSURES
IN NEIGHBORHOODS ARE GOING TO
BE DISTINCT IN OUR COMMUNITY
BASED ON WHERE THEY'RE WHETHER
HIS NEIGHBORHOOD THERE IS A
VERY DIFFERENT LEVEL
OF PRESSURE FOR DIFFERENT TYPES
OF DEVELOPMENT AND MAYBE THE
EQUIVALENT ZONE NEIGHBORHOODS
ELSEWHERE IN THE CITY, A LOT
OF THAT IS BECAUSE OF PROXIMITY
AND SO I DON'T WANT THIS HERE
TO SAY THAT WE NEED IT.
I PUT IT HERE TO SAY THAT THAT
MIGHT BE SOME WAY THAT HE USED
THE CITY COUNCIL COULD SAY WE
MIGHT HAVE TO WRESTLE WITH
DISTINCT APPROACHES TO ANSWER
THESE QUESTIONS IN SIMILARLY
ZONED AREAS GIVEN
OUR GOAL TO
REDUCE THE NUMBER OF ZONING
DISTRICTS.
AND SO MAYBE THAT ONE WAY IS TO
WITH OUR USED TO BE ABLE TO
DEFINE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF MULTIPLE HOUSES IN DIFFERENT
WAYS.
SO I'M NOT SAYING THAT I NEED
THAT.
IT IS AN IDEA THAT HAS BEEN
ORIGINATING FROM THE CONSULTING
TEAM AND I I'M PRESENTING IT AS
AN IDEA IF IT DOESN'T TO ME
THAT'S PART OF THIS DIALOG OR
THE NEXT DIALOG IS TO STRIKE
IT.
>> SO I JUST WANT TO STAY WITH
THE NEIGHBORHOOD SCALE BECAUSE
WE DID HAVE THAT CONVERSATION
AND THERE YOU KNOW, EVEN THE
PAPER PICKED UP OUR
CONVERSATION AROUND
NEIGHBORHOOD SCHOOL BECAUSE IT
CODIFIES EXCLUSIONARY POLICIES
BACK INTO WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
REMOVE.
>> SO I'M GOING TO GO BACK TO
MY QUESTION BECAUSE IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR ME TO UNDERSTAND
IN ORDER TO GIVE THE
APPROPRIATE LEVEL OF FEEDBACK
IF IF YOU FEEL LIKE YOU ARE
PRESENTING TO US A CODIFICATION
OF THE FEEDBACK THAT YOU'VE
RECEIVED FOR US TO AFFIRM OR
REJECT THAT IS DIFFERENT THEN
IT MAY BE A SORT OF EDITORIAL
LOOK AT WHAT YOU JUST DESCRIBED
WHICH IS NEIGHBORHOOD PRESSURE.
SO IT'S HARD FOR US TO DEFINE
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESSURE
SPECIFICALLY UNLESS YOU ARE
SAYING PEOPLE ARE PULLING
PERMITS AND THAT'S THE KIND
OF NEIGHBORHOOD PRESSURE WE
WANT TO RESPOND TO OTHERWISE I
DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS.
>> YEAH, I GUESS I'M I'M
STRUGGLING WITH I'M STRUGGLING
WITH THE IMPORTANCE OF THAT
QUESTION.
>> I PUT THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
QUESTION TO ME IS IF IF IF IT
CAME FROM FEEDBACK FROM THE
PUBLIC IN THIS PROCESS THEN I
WANT TO CONSIDER IT AS WE MOVE
ALONG.
>> IF IT CAME FROM AN EDITORIAL
SAYING HERE'S HOW I PLANNING
STAFF IS THINKING ABOUT THIS
THEN IT'S DIFFERENT BECAUSE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION CAN GIVE
PLANNING STAFF MORE DIRECTION
AND VERSUS US WANTING TO
INCORPORATE THE FEEDBACK THAT
YOU ARE DOING A SYNTHESIS FOR.
SO I THINK FOR ME IT'S IT'S
ACTUALLY VERY HELPFUL.
THE OTHER THING THAT I WAS
GOING TO BRING UP IN THE
DOCUMENT IS WE SEEM TO BE
REVISITING A BUNCH OF PARKING
AND THAT WAS SURPRISING TO ME.
>> AND SO I WAS LIKE WHERE DID
ALL THIS AUTO CENTRIC STUFF
COME FROM?
AND SO I WAS LIKE THAT'S NOT
THAT HAS NOT COME FROM THE
FEEDBACK.
NOBODY HAS GOTTEN UP AND SAID
WELL SOMEBODY HAS GOT ENOUGH
AND SAID PLEASE WHERE ARE THE
CARS GOING TO GO?
BUT THAT'S NOT BEEN THE
MAJORITY OF THE FEEDBACK AND AT
THE TABLE WE'VE BEEN VERY CLEAR
IT HAS BEEN MY BELIEF AND
UNDERSTANDING THAT WE HAVE BEEN
VERY CLEAR AROUND AUTO CENTRIC
DEVELOPMENT LIKE THAT'S NOT
SOMETHING WE WANT TO SPEND A
LOT OF ENERGY PERMITTING BUT
YET IT'S IN THIS IMPLEMENTATION
DIED.
>> SO TO ME I'M TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHERE THE ORIGIN IS
BECAUSE THE ORIGIN HELPS ME
UNDERSTAND HOW I RELATE TO IT.
YEAH.
DOES THAT DOES THAT HELP YOU
CLARIFY?
>> I'M STILL A LITTLE FUZZY ON
THE FIRST TWO TO GO TO THE
LATTER SO THAT IS TRYING TO
RESPOND TO ONE OF THE ONE
OF THE DIRECTIONS THAT I HAVE
HEARD LOUD AND CLEAR IS THE
ELIMINATION OF ANY ZONES THAT
WOULD SORT OF BE PROTECTIONIST
FROM SORT OF NON RESIDENTIAL
AND USES AND AND A LOT OF OUR
LANGUAGE IN THOSE TRANSITION
ZONES WHICH WE'VE MOVED THOSE
DISTRICTS TO ARE ABOUT FORM.
THEY ARE ABOUT RELATIONSHIP TO
THE STREET.
AND WHEN WE WERE TALKING ABOUT
TRYING TO INCORPORATE RESEARCH
AND LIGHT INDUSTRY ON A WIDE
VARIETY OF USES IN THERE, ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT I WANTED TO
PROPOSE IN THIS PLAN IS IF WE
WANT TO INCORPORATE THOSE USERS
INTO THOSE DISTRICTS WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO FIGURE OUT ONE
OF THE FORM BASED STANDARDS SO
THAT THEY CAN EXIST BECAUSE
THEY WON'T OFTEN FIT LIKE A ONE
TYPE TYPOLOGY.
AND SO I MIGHT NOT HAVE CRAFTED
THE LANGUAGE CORRECTLY BUT THAT
WAS MY INTENTION THAT IF WE
REALLY WANT THAT DISTRICT TO BE
REALLY FLEXIBLE IN A VERY WIDE
WAY WHERE IT CAN ACCOMMODATE
EVERYTHING FROM SORT OF A
TRANSIT ORIENTED RESIDENTIAL TO
CIRCULAR ECONOMY AUTO CENTRIC
TYPE VIEWS, WE'RE JUST GOING TO
BE REALLY MINDFUL OF HOW WE'RE
ACCOMMODATING BOTH THE OF THIS
AND THAT'S THAT'S THE ORIGIN
THAT I WANT TO HEAR FROM
PLANNER MICHEL AND THEN I WANT
TO JUST GIVE ONE MORE COMMENT
AND THEN LET COMMISSIONER THANK
YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE.
>> COMMISSIONER NORTON.
I JUST WANTED TO BE CLEAR FOR
TALKING ABOUT FIVE POINT THREE.
>> IS THAT IS THAT LIKE FIVE
POINT THREE?
I MEAN I'M CURRENTLY LIKE IN
ONE POINT ONE LYING DOWN ON THE
FOUR BEDROOMS BUT THERE ARE
OTHER ONES WITH THE CAR
CENTRALITY.
YEAH.
AND THAT THAT IS IN FIVE POINT
THREE.
OK AND THEN NINE POINT THREE TO
THAT WAS MY OH OK I HAVE
SOMETHING ELSE SO I WANT TO I
WANT TO BE CAREFUL THAT WE
DON'T CONFLATE OR COLLAPSE
THINGS BECAUSE IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT FOR ME TO DISTINGUISH
WHETHER YOU ARE HELPING TO
INFORM THE PLANNING COMMISSION
OF THE AGGREGATION OF THE
FEEDBACK THAT WE'VE RECEIVED
SINCE WE'VE STARTED THIS
PROCESS WHICH I THINK IS
VITALLY IMPORTANT FOR US TO
CONSIDER AS WE DO THIS
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN.
I THINK ONE WAY THAT WOULD HELP
ME IS IF IN THE NEXT ITERATION
THIS YOU COULD HAVE ANOTHER
COLUMN THAT COULD HAVE
SOMETHING ALONG THE LINES
OF THIS IS A FORM BASE TYPE
OF APPROACH BECAUSE THEN THAT
HELPS ME LOCATE WHERE THIS IS.
SO IF YOU ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE
A FORM BASED DESIGN AND THE WAY
THAT YOU ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE
THAT IS BY RESTRICTING UNITS
BECAUSE YOU THINK THAT'S THE
BEST WAY FOR US TO ACHIEVE THAT
FORM BASED DESIGN, THAT IS A
DIFFERENT CONVERSATION THAN IT
FEELS.
THIS IS THIS IS ARBITRARY.
SOMEONE PICKED FOUR BEDROOMS.
WHY IT'S NOT EVEN IN THE UDC WE
CAN GO UP TO SIX WHY NOT SIX
BEDROOMS SO THAT WAS A DECISION
SOMEONE MADE A DECISION I DON'T
KNOW IF IT WAS YOU OR THE
CONSULTANT AND NO ACCUSATION
WHATSOEVER WHEN I SAY YOU I
JUST WANT TO KNOW WHERE IT CAME
FROM SO THAT I CAN UNDERSTAND
IT SO I TREAT IT APPROPRIATELY.
>> DOES THAT MAKE SENSE?
>> OK, THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
GORDON.
SO I THINK I THINK THE PLACE TO
START OUT IS THAT THIS
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX SHOULD
FLOW FROM THE PLAN AND THE
POLICY DISCUSSIONS THAT WE HAVE
AND ALL OF THE MODIFICATIONS
THAT WE'VE ASKED FOR AND THE
FEEDBACK AND THEY'RE THE
THEY'RE THE TANGIBLE CONCRETE
ACTION STEPS THAT FLOW FROM THE
POLICY STATEMENT IN THE PLAN
THAT GIVE YOU GUIDANCE THE
PLANNING STAFF AND THE OTHER
UNITS IN THE CITY.
HERE'S NOW WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
DO TO IMPLEMENT THE PLAN AND
YOU AS THE COMMISSIONER AND AS
SOON AS THE COMMITTEE.
SO I DON'T SEE I GUESS I'M
DISAGREEING WITH YOU BUT I
DON'T I KNOW WE DISAGREE A LOT
.
>> I DON'T SEE THIS AS I MEAN
YOU'RE KIND OF SAYING THIS IS
SOMEHOW SEPARATE FROM AND IT'S
A DISTINCT STATEMENT THAT'S
EITHER COME FROM SOMEBODY OR
SOMEBODY I KNOW THE FOUR
BEDROOMS DOES NOT EXIST IN THE
PLAN THEN MY SECOND PRESUMPTION
IS WHAT'S HERE NOW IS IS
LAGGING BEHIND THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT WE'VE HAD
AND ISN'T REFLECTING ALL OF THE
MODIFICATIONS THAT WE ASKED FOR
,WHICH WAS WHY I WAS SAYING I
DON'T WANT TO SPEND A WHOLE LOT
OF TIME ON THIS NOW BECAUSE I
DON'T THINK IT'S UP TO DATE
WITH ALL OF THE FEEDBACK THAT
WE'VE GIVEN.
BUT WHAT I WANT TO HAVE THE
CONSULTANT DO AND YOU ALL DO IS
UPDATE THIS ONCE ONCE THE PLAN
POLICIES ARE DATED AND THE
DISCUSSION IN THE BACKGROUND
UPDATE THIS SO THAT IT REALLY
DOES FLOW FROM THE PLAN AND IS
CONSISTENT AND AND GIVE THAT TO
US ALL SO THAT AS WE READ
THROUGH EACH SECTION WE CAN
LOOK AT THE MATRIX TO SEE HOW
WHAT ARE THE CONCRETE STEPS
THAT ARE COMING OUT OF THIS AND
I'M PRESUMING THAT THAT WILL
TAKE CARE OF SOME THE WEIRD
THINGS THAT ARE POPPING UP.
I'M READING THEM AS THEY'RE
JUST THEY'RE LIKE THE FEEDBACK
BUT THE THE I DON'T THINK SO.
>> I DISAGREE.
I THINK THERE IS NOTHING IN THE
PLAN ABOUT THE ANIMAL BASE
REDEVELOPMENT.
THERE'S NOTHING IN THE PLAN
ABOUT THE BEDROOMS.
>> THERE'S THERE'S SOMETHING
THAT'S COMING FROM SOMEWHERE
ELSE CHARGES THIS SHOULD FLOW
FROM THE PLAN.
IT SHOULDN'T BE NEW STUFF
THAT'S COMING OUT OF NOWHERE
THAT HASN'T BEEN THE SKY.
>> SO THAT'S THE CHARGE ALL
COMMISSIONER AND THEN YOU MAY
SORRY I THOUGHT YOU WERE IN OUR
BEDROOM THING I READ THAT IS
SOMEHOW THE WAY THE CITY'S BEEN
TRYING TO REGULATE UNITS AND
THE WAY DEVELOPERS HAVE
RESPONDED TO THAT HAVE
CREATED THIS PERVERSE OUTCOME
WHERE WE'RE BUILDING LOTS
OF STUDENT HOUSING THAT CAN
ONLY BE USED FOR STUDENT
HOUSING.
IT'S NOT FLEXIBLE ENOUGH TO BE
USED FOR ANYTHING ELSE.
THIS IS A STATEMENT TRYING TO
GET IT.
WE NEED TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO DO
THIS TO CREATE THE RULES AND
APPLY THEM IN A WAY THAT
DOESN'T CREATE THAT KIND OF A
PERVERSE OUTCOME.
THAT'S A REALLY LONG, WORDY
WAY.
BUT I I READ THAT IS THAT WAS
AN ATTEMPT TO GET THERE MAYBE
WASN'T THE RIGHT BUT THAT'S THE
KIND OF SPECIFICITY WE NEED TO
MAKE SURE THAT IN DESIGNING
STANDARDS THAT WE DON'T CREATE
PERVERSE OUTCOMES THAT RESULTS
IN HOUSING UNIT TYPES THAT
AREN'T FLEXIBLE, SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
SO I THINK THE THE WHY THE YOU
KNOW WHAT ARE WE TRYING TO DO
AND WHY IS A CONCRETE ACTION
MAKES SENSE TO HAVE MAYBE A
LITTLE BIT BUT NOT TO SUCH GORY
DETAIL THAT IT BECOMES FIXED IN
STONE AND IT'S TO DETAIL THAT'S
THAT'S THE BALANCE WE NEED TO
STRIKE SO SO I GUESS I WAS
BEING HOPEFUL AS WE LOOK AT THE
REVISED PLAN THAT THIS WILL
FLOW FROM THIS MORE CLEARLY AND
BE CONSISTENT WITH THAT, I
THINK I CAN LEAD TO THAT
ARTICULATION IF THAT'S WHAT'S
HAPPENING.
WHAT WHAT'S UNCLEAR TO ME THUS
MY QUESTION IS HOW MUCH OF THIS
IS FROM FEEDBACK AND HOW MUCH
OF THIS IS EDITORIAL BUT OFF TO
COMMISSIONER TO ASK A QUESTION
THAT I THINK WILL HOPEFULLY
HELP US CLARIFY THAT A LITTLE
BIT MORE.
BUT FIRST, MICHEL, CAN YOU ASK
IN THE NEXT DRAFT THAT THEY
LIKE BULLET THESE DIFFERENT
LIKE I TELL SOME OF THEM LIKE
KIND OF RUN INTO EACH OTHER AND
THERE'S NOT ALWAYS SPACES AND
IT'S LIKE HARD FOR ME TO I'M
LIKE OH THIS ISN'T THE SAME.
WHAT ARE WE CALLING THEM?
THIS IS NOT A STRATEGY.
YEAH, IT'S ACTUALLY JUST DO THE
GRID LINES I WOULD HOPE CAN YOU
DO THE GRID LINES THINGS OK
SO
I THINK SO THIS IS MY GUESS AND
I AGREE WITH COMMISSIONER
NORTON LIKE YOU WOULD THINK
THAT YOU WOULD HAVE A GOAL
YOU'D HAVE A STRATEGY AND THEN
THESE THING IMPLEMENTATION LOOK
WHAT ARE WE CALLING THEM?
>> WHAT ARE YOU THESE LIKE I
WOULD CALL I WOULD USUALLY CALL
THEM ACTION ACTIONS.
GREAT LOVE IT.
>> THESE ACTIONS WOULD BE SO
TELL ME IF THIS IS HOW YOU
THINK THIS WENT DOWN LIKE THEY
WOULD BE BEST PRACTICES FROM
OTHER CITIES THAT THE
CONSULTANTS LIKE BASED ON LIKE
THEIR KNOWLEDGE OF WHAT THEY'VE
LEARNED BASED IN ANN ARBOR OR
JUST LIKE I DON'T KNOW THAT'S
WHAT I WOULD EXPECT THESE
THINGS TO BE LIKE ACTIONS BASED
IN SOME SORT OF KNOWLEDGE
OF SOMETHING.
SO I GUESS MY QUESTION IS LIKE
WHERE DID THEY COME?
IS THAT AN ACCURATE LIKE IS
KIND OF THE PROCESS THAT LED US
TO THESE ACTIONS LIKE LOOKING
AT LIKE BUT WHAT HAVE WE SEEN
IN OTHER CITIES THAT ALLOW FOR
MORE DENSITY AND RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS AND WHAT ARE THE
THINGS THAT THAT WE'VE SEEN
WORK OR THAT LIKE WE EXPECT TO
WORK THAT WOULD GET US THERE
BECAUSE I'M WONDERING IF THAT
IS WHY IF THAT IS NOT HOW THESE
WERE CREATED , IF THAT'S WHY
WE'RE SEEING THIS SORT OF LIKE
DISJOINTED LIST OF ACTIONS THAT
AREN'T ALWAYS AT THE SAME SORT
OF LIKE A LEVEL OF SPECIFICITY
I DON'T I MEAN I WOULD I THINK
IT MIGHT HELP TO UNDERSTAND THE
PROCESS BY WHICH WE CAME TO
THESE THINGS BUT I DON'T THINK
IT WAS BASED IN LIKE WHAT WE
WERE HEARING FROM FROM PEOPLE
AT ALL.
I THINK I THINK LIKE WHAT I
WOULD EXPECT IS THAT IT'S BASED
IN THINGS THAT THE CONSULTANTS
HAVE SEEN IN OTHER CITIES OR
LIKE SOME SORT OF KNOWLEDGE
BASE IN ALL OF THE RESEARCH AND
THAT'S WHY THEY HIRE THEM.
>> WE HEARD THEM TO HELP GUIDE
US AND THEN WITH YOUR INPUT.
YES.
SO I'LL TAKE A I'LL START HERE.
I THINK THE VARYING LEVEL
OF SPECIFICITY IS SORT OF BASED
ON THE GOAL AREA.
>> SO LIKE HOUSING FOR EXAMPLE
LENDS ITSELF MUCH MORE EASILY
TO ZONING WHICH YOU CAN WRITE
MORE SPECIFICALLY YOU CAN SEE
THESE RIGHT LIKE REDUCE OR
REMOVE REVIEW AND REWRITE LIKE
THESE ARE MORE SPECIFIC ACTIONS
THAT TELL US WHAT TO DO AND
THAT'S BECAUSE THAT'S WITHIN
OUR REALM AS PLANNING
COMMISSIONERS, AS PLANNING
STAFF.
I THINK THEY PROBABLY FEEL MORE
VAGUE IN OTHER AREAS BECAUSE IF
YOU SEE WHO LIKE THE LEAD,
WE'RE NOT ALWAYS THE LEAD
AGENCY RIGHT.
WE ARE ALSO ASSIGNING THINGS
FOR OTHER STAFF TO DO THAT WE
DON'T HAVE AN EXPERTIZE IN.
SO IT IS BROADER AND BIGGER AND
IT IT'S SORT OF FOR THEM TO AND
THEY'VE REVIEWED THIS FOR THEM
TO SIGN OFF ON AND SAY OK SO I
THINK THAT'S WHERE SOME OF THIS
VARYING LEVEL OF SPECIFICITY
COMES FROM AND I GUESS I WOULD
EXPECT GIVEN HOW HARD OF A
TOPIC IT IS CURRENTLY THAT THE
HOUSING ONES WOULD BE TO THIS
LEVEL AND COMPARISON TO OTHER
ONES UM IN TERMS OF WHERE THEY
COME FROM.
RIGHT.
YOU START WITH YOUR GOAL THAT
WE'VE AGREED ON AND THEN YES,
THESE ARE KNOWN WAYS TO ACHIEVE
THAT.
AT LEAST I CAN SPEAK TO THAT
COMFORTABLY WITH THE HOUSING
SOME OF THEM THEY MAY HAVE
MISSED THE MARK A LITTLE BIT BY
SAYING FOUR BEDROOMS
SPECIFICALLY BUT I DO THINK
THAT GETS AT CONVERSATIONS
WE'VE HAD HOUSING NOT BEING
FLEXIBLE ENOUGH AND THEN
WANTING TO DEFINE LIKE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF HOUSING TO
FIGURE OUT LIKE WHAT WE CAN DO
ABOUT THAT SO THAT THAT ONE I
CAN SEE HAS PROBABLY GONE AWRY
BECAUSE IT DOESN'T SPECIFICALLY
TALK ABOUT THAT IN A STRATEGY
SO WE CAN WE CAN WORK ON THAT
TO MAKE SURE THAT THEY ALIGN
MORE.
UM, THE AUTOMOBILE THING I
THINK THAT'S WHAT THE
COLLAPSING OF DIFFERENT
DISTRICTS.
>> RIGHT.
WE HAVE TO AS WE TALKED ABOUT
BROADENING WHAT IS ALLOWED
THERE AT LEAST IN MY
RECOLLECTION OF OUR LAST
CONVERSATION OR COLLAPSING
THINGS.
DO WE HAVE TO BROADEN THEM AND
SO NOW IT'S TRYING TO ACHIEVE
BOTH AND SO THAT I BELIEVE WAS
BASED ON A CONVERSATION THAT WE
ARE OUR INTERPRETATION OF HOW
TO WRITE SOMETHING BASED ON OUR
CONVERSATION THAT WASN'T MEANT
TO SURPRISE WELL AND COME OUT
OF NOWHERE.
SO YEAH, THESE ARE COMBINATION
OF LIKE BEST PRACTICES THINGS
WE'VE HEARD OUR RESEARCH THINGS
WE KNOW THAT OTHER COMMUNITIES
HAVE DONE.
IT'S IT'S A COMPLETE AND
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT UM, DOES
THAT ANSWER ANYTHING THAT YOU
THINK YOU ASK?
I THINK SO AND I THINK I'LL
JUST ADD THAT I THINK THE THE
ACTIONS THAT FEEL THE MOST
SUCCESSFUL TO ME ARE THE ONES
THAT SAY LIKE DO THIS TO DO
THIS.
>> SO LIKE THAT FOUR BEDROOM
ONE FOR EXAMPLE LIKE IT'S NOT
YEAH.
>> SO NOT ONLY IT'S LIKE WOW
THAT'S HYPER SPECIFIC BUT ALSO
IT'S LIKE WHAT DOES THAT DO.
>> YEAH.
SO THAT'S THE NOTE I HAVE IS
LIKE WHY TO WHAT END CLARIFY
THAT'S THOSE AT LEAST TO ME
HELP LIKE WITH THESE STRATEGIES
WE CAN MAKE SURE THAT THEY DO
YOU WHEN YOU READ THEM THEY
SHOULD CONNECT BACK TO THE GOAL
AND IF YOU'RE NOT SEEING THAT
THEN YOU NEED TO REWORK IT SO
THAT IT DOES SO THAT'S A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF ONE THAT WE CAN FIX
IN THAT WAY.
>> AND I THINK JUST TO WHERE
ARE YOU GOING TO SAY SOMETHING,
COMMISSIONER MILLS?
>> NOT DIRECTLY ON THIS.
I THINK JUST TO ADD IN THIS
STREAM, UM, IF THERE'S A WAY
THAT ONE OF THE GOALS IS TO
SIMPLIFY AND HOW WE ACHIEVE
THAT BECAUSE I THINK THAT HAS
BEEN A PART OF IT AS WELL.
I MEAN WE JUST HEARD FROM THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPER OFFICE THAT
OUR CODE AND OUR APPROACH IS
VERY COMPLEX AND SO ADDING
SOMETHING THAT THEN COMPLICATES
IT IS WHAT FILLS OUT A SCOPE IN
A LOT OF WAYS.
AND SO WE NEED I NEED TO HEAR
FROM YOU THAT IN ORDER FOR US
TO ACHIEVE THIS WE THINK WE
NEED TO ADD THIS AND THEN SO
THESE ARE THE WHAT YOU JUST
SAID COLLAPSING ONE DISTRICT WE
HAVE TO BROADEN SOME THE USE
BUT WE ALSO HAVE THE
CONVERSATION THAT SOME USES ARE
SELF LIMITING.
SO THERE ARE THINGS THAT ARE
JUST NOT GOING TO WORK BECAUSE
OF THE TYPE OF USE THAT IT IS
SO IF THERE'S MORE CLARITY,
EVEN IF IT'S AT THE TABLE WHERE
YOU YOU KNOW, I BRING UP THE
FOUR BEDROOMS, LET'S JUST LIKE
REALLY KILL THIS HORSE.
HORSES ARE GREAT.
JUST FOR THE RECORD THAT THAT
YOU WOULD SAY OK SORT
OF TOWARDS WITH MR. LEONARD
WOULD SAYING IN ORDER FOR US TO
ACHIEVE FORM BASE DESIGN,
HERE'S ONE CONSIDERATION RIGHT
.
>> AND THAT WE KNOW THAT THERE
IS A CONVERSATION THAT WE CAN
HAVE VERSUS THIS IS THE THIS IS
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN HERE
BECAUSE THEN IT FEELS LIKE A
FIGHT AND I DON'T FEEL LIKE IT
NEEDS TO BE A FIGHT IN THAT
REGARD.
>> I THINK IT'S IT'S SORT
OF LIKE OH OK.
NOW THAT WE UNDERSTAND THE
RATIONALE, LET'S TALK ABOUT HOW
WE ACHIEVE WHAT YOU FEEL LIKE
YOU NEED.
>> DOES THAT YEAH.
>> OK, GREAT.
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS', I WAS
GOING BACK TO SOME OF THE OTHER
PLANS THAT WE'VE HAD TO TRY TO
SEE LIKE WHAT I LIKED WHAT I
DIDN'T LIKE.
GREAT.
THERE'S ELEMENTS OF THIS THAT
REMIND ME A LOT OF THE MOVING
TOGETHER TO VISION ZERO PLAN.
I MEAN IN TERMS OF THE
STRATEGIES LIKE THEY'VE GOT A
MATRIX AT THE END THAT'S
ALIGNED.
>> IT ALSO INCLUDES THE VALUES
I DON'T THINK OUR VALUES ADD
VERY MUCH IN THE TRANSPORTATION
ONE THERE WERE MULTIPLE VALUES
AND SO LIKE EACH STRATEGY
DIDN'T REALLY HIT ON MULTIPLE
LIKE WE HAVE THREE AND SO I
JUST I WOULD LOVE THAT I JUST
DON'T THINK IT ADDS VERY MUCH.
>> I AM LOOKING AT THE AGAIN
AND THE MOVING TOGETHER
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
>> THEY'VE GOT A STRATEGY AND
THEN THEY HAVE A TARGET LIKE
AND SO I I'M CURIOUS ABOUT THAT
AND AND MAYBE AND THOSE TARGETS
ARE REALLY LIKE TIME-BASED
RIGHT.
AND SO THAT'S ACTUALLY MY OTHER
COMMENT IN TERMS OF COMPARING
LIKE I THINK THAT WE SHOULD BE
CLEARER WHAT WE MEAN BY SHORT
INTERMEDIATE AND LONG TERM.
SO THAT THE PUBLIC AND
OURSELVES CAN RIGHTLY SAY YOU
DIDN'T DO THIS AND IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE DONE FIVE YEARS
AGO.
I THINK THAT THAT LIKE IN TERMS
OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND THAT'S
WHAT I DO LIKE ABOUT THE
TARGETS AGAIN, PLANS ARE VERY
OFTEN ASPIRATIONAL AND I THINK
IT'S A VAGUE PLAN.
>> YOU CAN DECLARE VICTORY.
I THINK SO LIKE FIGURING IF
EVEN IF IT'S LIKE MAKING THE
CHANGES, EVEN IF WE'RE NOT
SPECIFIC ABOUT WHAT THE LIKE
AGAIN I AGREE WITH THE
CONVERSATION THAT JUST HAPPENED
THAT WE DON'T NEED TO REHASH
ABOUT LIKE WHAT IS THE RIGHT
LEVEL OF SPECIFICITY BUT I'M I
DO THINK LIKE TALKING A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT WHAT WE MEAN BY
SHORT.
>> OH YEAH.
YEAH.
THAT I THINK THAT'S AN EASY
CHANGE.
I DID WANT TO LET YOU ALL KNOW
ONE ONE THING THAT WE HAD
DISCUSSED AS A GROUP IS
REMEMBER THE THE CALL-OUT THAT
HAD OBJECTIVES IN THEM AND THE
NOTE WAS TO LIKE FOLD THOSE IN
SOMEHOW TO THE STRATEGIES.
SO IN DISCUSSION ABOUT THAT WE
THOUGHT THAT MAYBE THAT THOSE
COULD BE EITHER INCLUDED
THEY'RE STILL WORKING ON IT.
WE HAVEN'T SEEN THE DRAFT
EITHER THAT'S COMING THAT THOSE
COULD BE POTENTIALLY METRICS
INSTEAD OR ATTACHED TO THIS
MATRIX SO THAT THEY ARE MORE
CONCRETE OR THAT THEY GIVE US
SOMETHING TO WORK TOWARDS
OTHERWISE THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN
PROBABLY FOLDED IN AS NARRATIVE
UNDER THE OBJECTIVES ARE UNDER
THE STRATEGIES AND MANY OF THEM
CROSSED MANY DIFFERENT AREAS.
>> AND SO THAT WAS ANOTHER
THING THAT WE HAD DISCUSSED
HERE WAS
PROVIDING THEM HERE
INSTEAD SO EFFECTIVELY OUT IN
ANOTHER COLUMN BETTER MATCH TO
HERE IS THE IMPLEMENTOR ACTION
ITEM.
>> THAT'S MY GUESS.
I HAVEN'T SEEN HOW THEY'RE
GOING TO ORGANIZE IT BUT I DO I
THINK IT'LL BE SOMEWHERE IN
THIS TABLE OR IN CHAPTER
INSTEAD ATTACHED TO THE GOAL
AREAS AT LEAST.
>> YEAH I I'LL JUST SAY I WENT
THROUGH THE I REALLY LIKED THE
LAST TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
>> I THOUGHT WAS WELL WRITTEN
AND I THINK IT WAS CLEAR LIKE
IMPLEMENTABLE THERE ARE
STRATEGIES OR ACTION ITEMS THAT
APPEAR LATER ON THAT WE'RE NOT
THERE'S A COUPLE THAT TALK
SPECIFICALLY ABOUT RUNNING A
SURVEY.
THERE WAS NOTHING IN THE ABOVE
THAT TALKED ABOUT A SURVEY AND
AT THE TIME NEVER LIKE I CAN
UNDERSTAND THAT YOU MIGHT NOT
NECESSARILY IN CHAPTER FIVE SAY
EXACTLY THE THINGS THAT ARE
GOING TO BE IN CHAPTER SIX LIKE
OTHERWISE IT'S TOO MANY WORDS
LIKE WE WANT TO BE SUCCINCT IN
WHAT WE'RE DOING BUT I THINK I
I DO THINK IT WILL BE SO I
THINK READING THEM SEQUENTIALLY
LIKE HAVING THEM COMPARE LIKE
WHAT THE NEW TEXT OF CHAPTER
FIVE IS NEXT TO CHAPTER SIX
WILL HELP US MAKE SURE THAT
WE'RE LIKE LOGICALLY FOLLOWS.
BUT I DON'T THINK THAT WHAT WE
SHOULD BE SAYING IS THAT IT CAN
ONLY BE IN CHAPTER SIX IF IT'S
BEEN MENTIONED IN CHAPTER FIVE
NECESSARILY LIKE OR MAYBE MAYBE
THAT'S A TOPIC FOR DISCUSSION.
I'LL JUST LIKE I THINK THAT
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THAT GIVE
MORE SPECIFICITY ABOUT WHAT
WE'RE GOING FOR IN WHAT WOULD
BE OUR CHAPTER SIX THAT THAT
MAY YOU DON'T WANT TO GO INTO
ALL OF THE DETAIL IN CHAPTER
FIVE SO OK, COMMISSIONER
WETHERBEE.
>> SO THIS IS JUST SINCE WE
JUST TALKED ABOUT THE TIME THIS
IS A MORE SPECIFIC THING BUT
MAYBE MORE GENERAL I JUST
NOTICED IT ON THE ONE SO WE
HAVE THE ONE POINT THREE
SUPPORT TO PRESERVE EXISTING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT THAT HIS
INTERMEDIATE AND LONG TERM AND
IT'S ONE OF THOSE THINGS
OF LIKE WELL IF WE WAIT TO
SUPPORT AND PRESERVE EXISTING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THEN IT MAY
BE GONE BY THE TIME LIKE SO SO
THIS WAS JUST LIKE I SAID JUST
ONE EXAMPLE IS MAKING SURE THAT
THE THE TIME FRAME SO
INTERMEDIATE BUT IS NEAR TERM
INTERMEDIATE AND LONG TERM
DON'T ARE CONFLICTING WITH THE
INTENT.
SO IF THE INTENT IS TO TO
PRESERVE AN EXISTING SOMETHING
THAT THAT NEEDS TO BE KIND OF A
NEAR TERM AND AND JUST KIND
OF MAKING SURE THAT THEY SORT
OF FOLLOW THAT WE DON'T YOU
KNOW, IF IF PRESERVING EXISTING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ENDS UP ONLY
IN INTERMEDIATE AND LONG TERM
DID WE WHAT IF WE SORT THEM BY
NEAR INTERMEDIATE LONG SO WE
CAN THAT WAY WHEN WE READ
THROUGH THEM IT WOULD BE HANCEY
I THINK IT WOULD BE HELPFUL TO
SEE I MEAN AS ONE OF THE
POSSIBLE OPTIONS OF HOW
ASSORTED STRATEGY IT MIGHT BE
WITHIN THE STRATEGY TO SORT
OF LIKE SORT ALL OF THE STRATA
OF THE ACTIONS BY COLUMN E
STARTING WITH NEAR ALL THE
NEWER ONES GROUPED AT TOP UNDER
THEIR GOAL SORRY UNDER THEIR
GOAL.
SO THIS IS A SPREADSHEET.
CAN WE GET A COPY OF IT IN THE
SPREADSHEET FORMAT AS OPPOSED
TO THE PDF?
>> I THINK SO YEAH.
OK THANK YOU.
AND THEN WE COULD SORT IT
HOWEVER WE NEEDED THE TIME TO
REFINE WHAT YOU JUST SAID YOU
CAN IF YOU SPEAK INTO YOUR
ACTION THERE MAY BE THINGS ALL
OF THE THE WHOLE TIME NOT JUST
OH YEAH ONGOING COULD BE
STRUCTURED SO THAT THERE ARE
EXCLUSIVE IDEAS NEAR TERM
INTERMEDIATE OR LONG TERM WRITE
GOOD BUT PRESERVE EXISTING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING SHOULD BE
SOMETHING THAT'S WE START NOW
ALL THE TIME SO YOU MIGHT WANT
ANOTHER CATEGORY OF CONTINUOUS
THROUGHOUT OR SOMETHING
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WHILE WE DIDN'T DISCUSS THE
WHOLE DOCUMENT WE DISCUSSED
SOME OF THE DOCUMENT.
>> DID YOU GET WHAT YOU NEEDED
FROM US?
I THINK SO.
DO YOU HAVE QUESTIONS?
DO YOU HAVE INSTRUCTIONS FOR US
?
>> JUST SEND ME YOUR COMMENTS
BY THE 17TH ONCE RECEIVED AND
ONCE YOU RECEIVE THE DRAFT.
THANK YOU ON THE TEN BECAUSE I
HAVE COMMENTS BUT I DON'T KNOW
WHAT YEAH.
>> AND WE WILL GET IT JUST AS A
PROCESS ORDER WILL RECEIVE IT
VIA EMAIL BUT IT WILL ALSO BE
PUBLISHED SIMULTANEOUSLY ON
ENGAGE.
>> YEAH THE NEW DRAFT WILL BE
POSTED PUBLICLY ON THE ENGAGE
PLATFORM.
OK BUT WE'LL GET IT WHAT WE
NEED TO GO THERE TO GET IT WE
GET IT NOW.
SURE YOU GOT ALL RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
ANY FINAL COMMENT BEFORE WE
MOVE ON TO AGENDA ITEM NUMBER
ELEVEN AGENDA ITEM NUMBER
ELEVEN PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE
WE'LL HEAR FIRST FROM THOSE WHO
ARE PRESENT AND THE CHAMBER
THEN REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO
SPEAK REMOTELY PRESS STAR NINE
IF ON PHONE OR USE THE RAISED
HAND FEATURE IN ZOOM FOR PHONE
ACCESS DIAL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
FIVE THREE EXCUSE ME EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND INTER
MEETING ID NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX
SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX
.
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
DIGITS THEIR PHONE NUMBER OR BY
THEIR NAME FOR SOME USERS YOU
WILL HEAR AN ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN
IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE
ENSURE YOU'RE IN A QUIET SPACE
AND MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE
FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS WHETHER IN
THE CHAMBER OR ON ZOOM.
>> PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANY ONE PRESENT IN THE
CHAMBER WHO WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS THE COMMISSION?
COME RIGHT UP EVERYONE MENDING
ROAD.
>> SO FIRST OF ALL THANK YOU
ALL I'M LEARNING HOW THIS
PROCESS WORKS.
I APPRECIATE THAT THESE
MEETINGS ARE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC
IN HOURS WHERE MANY RESIDENTS
CAN ATTEND.
IT'S NOW NINE THIRTY SO I
APPRECIATE YOU ALL COMMISSIONER
NORTON.
I JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY
SOMETHING I BELIEVE WHEN SKY
THE OF THE WATER PRESENTATION I
COULDN'T TELL IN YOUR DIALOG IF
SHE WAS REFERRING THE LOW END
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN HERE OR IF IT WAS THE
SIMCOCK DATA.
SO SO AGAIN I CAN REACH OUT TO
HER BUT AT LEAST FOR THE PUBLIC
RECORD I JUST WOULD LIKE THAT
CLARIFIED WHAT WE MEANT WHEN HE
SAID LOW END AND I I THINK YOUR
YOUR QUESTION WAS A GOOD ONE
AND THAT I WOULD LIKE TO
UNDERSTAND AS WELL THE QUESTION
THAT I WOULD REALLY LIKE TO
UNDERSTAND THAT IF I KNOW THIS
YOU ALL ARE NOT GOING TO KILL
THE PLAN BUT I THINK I WOULD
LIKE TO UNDERSTAND IF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DID NOT
EXIST, IF WE WOULD NEED TO
UPGRADE FACILITIES IF YES.
WHEN AND IF THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN DID NOT EXIST.
DO WE NEED TO EXPAND FACILITIES
IN THAT NEW FACILITY IF YES,
WHEN THE OTHER THING I LEARNED
I DIDN'T REALIZE THE SIMCOCK
DATA WAS DISCREDITED.
I'VE KIND OF INFERRED THAT THE
REASON WE BELIEVE THAT IT
SHOULD BE DISCREDITED IS THAT
THE PACE OF CURRENT GROWTH WILL
CONTINUE IN THAT OR THAT GROWTH
HAS INCREASED IN THE LAST THREE
OR FOUR YEARS SINCE THE DATA IS
AVAILABLE.
BUT I JUST CAUTION MAKING A
THIRTY YEAR PLAN BASED ON THREE
YEARS OF OF GROWTH DATA OR
WHATEVER THAT MIGHT BE IF
THAT'S THE CASE.
>> THIS IS AGAIN JUST WHAT I
INFERRED FROM THAT CONVERSATION
AND THEN YEAH I GUESS
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT, I
APPRECIATE WHAT YOU'RE SAYING
ABOUT DEVELOPMENT COSTS BEING
REALLY, REALLY HIGH RIGHT NOW.
AND AGAIN, JUST KIND
OF TOUCHING ON THE LAST POINT
ABOUT PRESERVING EXISTING LOW
AND MODERATE COST HOUSING.
YOU KNOW, IT SEEMS LIKE WE'RE
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT THIS WILL IN
THE SHORT TERM AND EVEN THE MID
TERM INCREASE LAND VALUES IN
COST AND SO, YOU KNOW, WE THINK
THAT THIS HAS BEEN VETTED IN
URBAN AREAS SOMEDAY WILL PAY
OFF.
BUT I GUESS WHAT I'M SAYING IS
THAT I SAW MORE ANIBA
DEVELOPMENTS LIKE VIRIDIAN,
RIGHT.
THAT SEEM TO HAVE PRICE POINTS
AVAILABLE TO MANY DIFFERENT
INCOME BRACKETS THAT HAD THE
DENSITY AND THAT WE'RE
THOUGHTFUL ABOUT SUSTAINABILITY
.
I WOULDN'T BE HERE TONIGHT.
SO I APPRECIATE WHAT YOU'RE
DOING THERE SO THANK YOU.
>> AND ANYWAYS I APPRECIATE YOU
GUYS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> GOOD.
THANK YOU
.
>> HELLO AGAIN CARQUEST FOUR
THIRTY FIVE POINT FIVE CHARTER
PLANES.
I WAS LISTENING WITH INTEREST
ABOUT THE THE CONVERSATION YOU
JUST HAD ABOUT HOUSING
PRESERVATION AND I WAS UNCLEAR
AND I SAID THIS IN MY NOTE TO
YOU GUYS IF THAT WAS REFERRING
TO SUBSIDIZED CURRENTLY
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING OR OR MARKET
RATE AFFORDABLE MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND I GUESS I WOULD
JUST URGE YOU TO EXERCISE
CAUTION IF WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
POTENTIALLY CRAFTING POLICIES
THAT TRIES TO INHIBIT THE
REDEVELOPMENT OF CERTAIN AREAS
OF THE CITY.
I THINK WE SHOULD DEFINITELY BE
FOCUSING ON PERMANENT
AFFORDABILITY.
WE SHOULD BE FOCUSING TENANT
RIGHTS AND ASSISTANCE
RELOCATION.
I JUST HADN'T RECALL THE
CONVERSATION
ABOUT POTENTIALLY
LOOKING AT DIFFERENT POLICIES
FOR EXISTING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING, NATURALLY OCCURRING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
SO HOPEFULLY THAT WILL BE
CLARIFIED IN THE NEXT MEETING.
I THINK THERE IS JUST TALKING
ABOUT MAKING ROOM FOR FLEXIBLE
USES AND MAKING MAKING SURE
THAT WE HAVE AN EXPANSIVE
EXPANSIVE REGULATIONS THAT
ALLOWS DIFFERENT DIFFERENT
TYPES OF INDUSTRIES AND
COMPANIES TO LOCATE HERE.
I THINK IT COULD WARRANT, YOU
KNOW, LOOKING AT ONE AND SAYING
OK, WELL IF IT'S NOT ON A MAIN
TRANSIT CORRIDOR, DO WE NEED
THE TWO STOREY MINIMUM OR DO WE
NEED CERTAIN FRONTAGE
REQUIREMENTS?
I THINK DIFFERENT REQUIREMENTS
HAVE BEEN ELIMINATED ANYWAY BUT
I SEE THAT YOU KNOW, THAT COULD
BE AN DIFFERENT CONVERSATION
AND TO IMPROVE FLEXIBILITY IN
SOME AREAS THAT ARE NOT ON MAIN
TRANSIT CORRIDORS, WHAT DON'T
YOU THINK WOULD BE A GOOD
DIRECTION TO GO IN IS TO LOOK
AT SHORT TERM FEASIBLE USES AND
IF IF IT'S A SHOPPING CENTER OR
IF IT'S AN OFFICE PARK WITH YOU
KNOW, SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT
PARKING COVERAGE AND A LOT
OF EMPTY SPACE, IS THAT
SOMETHING WE WANT YOU KNOW,
EVEN THE NEXT TEN, FIFTEEN,
TWENTY YEARS IN OUR CITY SO I
DON'T HAVE THE ANSWER BUT I
JUST HOPE HOPE IT BECOMES A
CONVERSATION.
THANKS.
THANK YOU.
SAYING NO OTHER PARTICIPANTS IN
THE CHAMBER.
MR. LEONARD, DO WE HAVE ONLINE
PURCHASES?
>> WE DO.
MARK SCHERBA YOU CAN COMMUTE TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES
MAXIMINO TWENTY SEVENTEEN FIRST
I WANTED TO ADDRESS SOME OF THE
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
DISCUSSIONS.
I JUST SENT AN EMAIL ABOUT THIS
BUT I'LL REPEAT IT HERE.
SO MY UNDERSTANDING BASED ON
THAT PRESENTATION IS THAT
THERE'S A WATER TREATMENT PLANT
THAT'S ALMOST A HUNDRED YEARS
OLD AND WE ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
REPLACE THAT AND WE HAVE A PLAN
OF REPLACING THAT IT'S OLD AND
IT NEEDS TO BE REPLACED
REGARDLESS OF WHAT GROWTH
HAPPENS OR DOESN'T HAPPEN.
THERE'S ALSO VERY CONSERVATIVE
ESTIMATES ON GROWTH THAT ARE
FROM SIMCOCK AND MAYBE ARE A
RESULT OF OUR EXISTING ZONING
LAWS.
THERE'S ALSO MORE AGGRESSIVE OR
AGGRESSIVE I WILL SAY MORE
HOPEFUL GROWTH GOALS.
BUT IN ANY CASE ANY FORM
OF GROWTH IT SOUNDS LIKE IS
GOING TO REQUIRE US TO HAVE A
NEW WATER TREATMENT PLANT.
IT'S JUST A QUESTION OF LIKE
TEN YEARS VERSUS TWENTY YEARS
BUT ANY FORM OF GROWTH THAT'S
GOING TO REQUIRE MORE WATER
TREATMENT AND IN FACT PERHAPS
THE NEW WATER SOURCE.
SO MY MAIN QUESTION IS WHAT IS
OUR PLAN EVEN IF WE DIDN'T SEE
A BIG UPTICK IN THE RATE
OF GROWTH, WHAT IS OUR PLAN FOR
BUILDING NEW WATER TREATMENT
PLANTS OR GETTING A NEW WATER
SOURCE >> ABOUT THE BEST
OF WHAT THAT TIMEFRAME IS,
WHETHER IT'S TEN YEARS OR 20
YEARS, I'D RATHER THOSE UPFRONT
CAPITAL COSTS BE DISTRIBUTED
AMONG MORE RESIDENTS.
AS A PERSON WHO LIVES HERE I
WILL PAY LESS TO SUPPORT THAT
NEW PLAN IF I IF I HAVE MORE
NEIGHBORS TO DISTRIBUTE THAT
NEW PLANTS COST ROSS AND I'LL
ALSO NOTE THAT RESIDENTS IN
NEWER DEVELOPMENTS BOTH RENTERS
AND OWNERS WILL PAY MORE
OF THIS CAPITAL COST BECAUSE
NEW DEVELOPMENT PAYS HIGHER TAX
RATES.
I ALSO WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE
PUTTING DRAIN DISCONNECTS THAT
WAS MENTIONED VERY BRIEFLY BUT
GETTING DURING DISCONNECTS
OF EXISTING HOUSING STOCK COULD
DECREASE THE WET WEATHER
SANITARY SEWER VOLUMES WE USED
TO HAVE A PROGRAM WHERE WE WERE
DISCONNECTING FROM DRAINS AND
WE STOPPED DOING THAT.
AS FAR AS I KNOW THIS IS
ALREADY REQUIRED SUPPORT FOR
NEW DEVELOPMENT.
SO AGAIN, NEW DEVELOPMENT HELPS
US IN TERMS OF MANAGING
STORMWATER, PREVENTING YOU FROM
GETTING INTO OUR SANITARY SEWER
SYSTEM AND THEN FINALLY BACK ON
THE CAPACITY ANALYSIS AND THERE
WAS SOME DISCUSSION OF THIS BUT
THIRTY MORE SECONDS THAT
ANALYSIS WAS ASSUMING THAT
PEOPLE KNEW PEOPLE USE THE SAME
AMOUNT OF WATER AS WE USE
TODAY.
BUT WE'VE SEEN A 15 PERCENT
DROP IN WATER USAGE AS THE CITY
HAS GROWN AND I'D ASK CAN OUR
CONSULTANTS CREATE A SIMPLE
MODEL FOR USE PER PERSON AS A
FUNCTION OF POPULATION DENSITY
USING OTHER CITIES AND THEIR
USE CHANGES OVER TIME TO HELP
US ANALYZE HOW MORE PEOPLE WILL
END UP USING FEWER LESS WATER
PER PERSON?
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> NO OTHER HANDS RAISED
.
OK, I WILL CLOSE THE PUBLIC
COMMENT AND MOVE US ON TO ITEM
NUMBER TWELVE COMMISSION
PROPOSED BUSINESS.
>> IS THERE ANY
SEEING?
NONE.
I'LL MOVE US TO AGENDA NUMBER
THIRTEEN ADJOURNMENT MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY AYE OR
WE ARE ADJOURNED.
>> WE